Thank you very much. 
is [Music], read the congratulations, so,,, visitors!
, everyone rise for the pledge and then remain standing for a moment of silence with liberty and justice for all. 
Thank you [Music] good evening. 
Everyone, as you can see, the board of education is attempting to return to some form of public meeting, which is also compliant within the limits set forth by the governor's executive orders and the guidelines of the cdc and department of health. 
We must limit the number of people permitted to be physically present as a part of our compliance with those obligations. 
Perhaps the most important item for our meeting tonight is a public discussion about the reopening plan for september, as it pertains to the plan. 
We hope to have answers to most of your questions as part of the presentation, but may also need time for the administration to research, an issue on occasion. 
You can always email the superintendent with the question as well. 
I am also aware that some attendees may wish to speak about matters related to conversations that occurred on social media and the role of the board of education. 
In that regard, if you wish to speak, be sure to fill out a card and give it to the district clerk. 
There will be two opportunities for public to speak at this meeting. 
The first is limited to comments relating to agenda items only. 
We will then move through the agenda after we complete the agenda items. 
A second opportunity for public comment about non-agenda items will be provided. 
I ask that all present be reminded to be respectful of one another. 
The administration and the board. 
Also the opportunity for public comment is just that public comment. 
The board of education will not engage in debate or back and forth with the public during the period of public comment in an attempt to provide all who wish to speak an opportunity to do so. 
Our policy limits comments to three minutes. 
There may be people who wish to speak, who have been left outside due to space limitations. 
ask security station at the doors for a card and they will bring it in to the clerk again. 
While we respect the community and we always want to provide people with the opportunity to be heard if things devolve into personal insult or invective as the president, I will entertain a motion to adjourn the meeting. 
I thank you all in advance for your cooperation to start tonight's meeting. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe are going to make a presentation about our reentry plan. 
Sure miss florio. 
Could you fire up the cameras for us all right 
just give us a moment. 
While we wait for that and while we're doing that, I'd also like to apologize to those from watching from home, because, unfortunately, obviously from that distance you're not really going to be able to see our screen. 
So for that we're very sorry. 
You know, unfortunately, the limitations of how many people are in the room you know have we been able to move it to an auditorium. 
We certainly would have done that, but we're limited to a total of 50 people or 50 of a room's capacity. 
Whichever number is lower, so, unfortunately we're at that 50 capacity in this room this evening. 
This document, we're going to show tonight again is another evolving document. 
Back on the 31st, we placed the district's plan on the website, as required by state law. 
That plan had to talk about three different models for return, which it did since the plan was posted on the website. 
You may have seen additional commentary from our governor where he has since changed some of the parameters, such as offering additional opportunities for choice for family and or for staff. 
So we need to take those things into consideration. 
So again, this document and the presentation you're going to see this evening is the most accurate as of now, but it by far is not completed at the conclusion of tonight's meeting in this presentation, you're going to get a copy of this presentation emailed to you through the school messenger system, it'll also be up on social media and it'll, be up on our website
, you're, also going to receive an invitation to participate in a survey regarding choice. 
It's a follow-up to the survey that we sent out last week, where we asked potential preferences, this one's going to need to be more definitive where we actually need to know which families are looking to have their children receive instruction at home versus those that are willing to send children to school. 
So without further ado, I'm going to ask miss heinz to start us off. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe. 
So this morning we actually concluded and had our last committee meeting, which culminated in the plan that we're going to be sharing with you tonight and, as mr o'keefe said, all of the community members will be receiving at eight o'clock a phone call to this manner and also the plan and the survey for remote learning. 
I just want to thank all of the folks that were on that committee with us. 
We are made up of several community members unit leaders, staff of all sorts, and it really has been a pleasure to work with everybody. 
Excuse me one second, while I got this on, so 
after a tremendous amount of feedback that we received from our survey from our community and given the lengthy documents that we have given out and the models over the past few months, I can happily say that we are able to offer a full return for our elementary students k-5, as well as a full return for our students with disabilities, our special class, which would be our 15-1 classes, our 12-1 classes and our 8-1 students, and at the secondary level due to size and the fact that, because we will need to reappropriate space at both levels, elementary and secondary, we will have to move forward with a hybrid model for grades six to twelve, and that will be an a b schedule based on alpha and household. 
The reason why we were able to offer a full return for our elementary school is because mr o'keefe and myself and our instructional directors and our director for facilities and the building principal began walk-throughs. 
Last week. 
We walked through each and every room in our buildings to space and measure at six feet. 
On the average we are able to fit about 17 students in a class. 
Now again, know that we have scheduled a full return with our total population, so with any remote instruction that would diminish the amount of students coming into our schools, so we would actually have even more room because of the re appropriation of space we needed about one extra section or one extra grade level k5 at each building generally, so we are going to be utilizing space in our libraries in our arts and our music rooms and other common areas, 
which we'll talk about a little bit later on remote learning is something that, as you know, last week, it was confirmed that we will, as districts need to be offering this to our students as well. 
This will be a parent choice and a consent tonight at eight o'clock. 
Again, when you receive that plan, there will be a survey in there 
and we ask that only parents who are looking to remotely instruct their child fill out the survey, and it is due. 
It is a fast turnaround by friday. 
We need to be able to staff and schedule the remaining students that we have coming into our schools, 
remote learning again, that is by a parent's choice with consent and at this time it is a decision for the entirety of the 2021 school year. 
I say this now because, based on the number of possible staff who may also look for accommodations, that might mean staff members staying home in conjunction with our students, we need to match up to see if we have enough staff members who are going to be able to offer remote instruction or should we have to look towards live streaming. 
If we do not have enough certificated staff that matches up with the number of students, and so therefore we would not have possibly a physical space for students to come back to. 
If that were the case, should, of course, all restrictions be lifted through the governor's office, then we would have to, and hopefully would have a little bit of time in between. 
We would just have to restructure and reschedule to ensure that all students are able to return remote instruction will entail. 
It is not like being in person school and it is not distance. 
Learning. 
Distance learning is only going to be offered. 
If, again, we are ordered by the governor's office to remain at home. 
All students and all staff remain at home, and that would be live instruction for two and a half hours on google me that would be k12. 
Remote learning is different. 
This is, more asynchronous learning with possible, live or streaming teaching happening throughout the day. 
This would also be a schedule that would look a tad different based again on the number of students and how we would need to support everybody, but we just did want to be. 
You know fully upfront and present about that. 
We also know that devices for us we are not a one-to-one school district. 
We have definitely made some strides and we are in the middle of major infrastructure work that is going on. 
We just did order about a thousand new chromebooks in order to be able to disperse for families that do not have any technology in their home at all, but it would be difficult for us to provide a device for every student in their home should they be on remote learning. 
So that would be something that the family would also have to consider. 
Students will be expected to complete all assignments daily and any students, obviously with disabilities on remote learning, would be provided all of their accommodations as per iep. 
As for their iep okay
, it's important
, I'm sorry, it's important to just also talk about the secondary hybrid model for six to twelve. 
On your a day, let's just say, you know, for the sake of just explaining it to everybody, it would be a combination on on a day. 
You would be in your child would run their traditional regular schedule. 
They would leave with homework and any work that would be on their google classroom for the next day that they are home, while the teacher is then teaching the other second half of the class on b. Obviously, our teachers are committed folks and they would be checking in answering any questions within that 24-hour period, but we would expect that at the secondary level, again, kids will be making sure that all of their assignments are completed and they are, and they are present. 
Attendance is important as we move forward in this school year.
, now that we shared with you a model of how we're looking to return our students, I think it's very important that all families and community members now our staff knows about the health and safety measures that we are putting in place, and we continue to look to put more in place as as time goes on, masks will be required for all staff and students, both in school and on the bus. 
Remember that the bus is an extension of school, any students are having any difficulty wearing a mask for medical reasons or because of a disability will need to submit documentation. 
As always, they would affirm this with their building principle or through the office of student services. 
Mass breaks will be provided because remember in our classrooms. 
Our desks are six feet apart and in the regulations. 
Children do not have to wear a mask during instruction. 
We would encourage, of course, that masks be worn at all times, but that does give us the opportunity to give multiple mass breaks whenever a child does need it, while they're being instructed masks are to be worn, though, however, in the hallways cafeterias, if they're not eating recess any other common area that we would just want to be safe,, we also every day. 
I'm, excuse me. 
bus travel will also include, as I said, before, social distancing practices optimally. 
We will be looking for six feet spacing and encouraging family members to sit together. 
Every day, parents and staff will be expected to fill out an online health screening survey and in this presentation, when you do receive it, you will see a hyperlink in there that you can see a sample of what it looks like ahead of time. 
We are also. 
We also took time to ensure that at arrival and dismissal, varied entrances in all of our buildings will be sanctioned off to separate grade levels. 
If they come off of the bus, we are also looking to take off the grade levels at increments of time off the bus. 
So everybody is not coming out at the same time so again, just looking to work ways to have plenty of flow while classmans may not look typical, especially at the younger levels. 
You may not see some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see. 
know that our classrooms will be warm and inviting they always are, because their teachers will be there. 
Their principals will be there and we will still be able to decorate it. 
We will just not be able to decorate it with things that kids will be touching, because it would need to be sanitized every day. 
All classrooms will be devoid, as I said before, of any of those items that may collect germs. 
We are in the process right now, of setting up opportunities for our teachers to continue to clean out their their own personal items, and we are also moving out any unwanted furniture that we don't need in the room so that we can maximize the space hallways and other common spaces are being marked appropriately to ensure social, distancing, so markings on the floor items around on the walls and that's also shared later on in our presentation. 
So you will be able to see it at home as well. 
When you open up the link hand, sanitizer stations are located throughout each building, all along the hallways. 
We will also be having them at the elementary level or any other area for gym cafeteria time when, at the secondary level, they're able to go out so as children go in and out, they can use a hand sanitizer as they come into school. 
All of those. 
You know, welcoming areas would have a hand sanitizer station as well and at the elementary level. 
We would expect that the students, because we do have sinks in every room they would be washing their hands before and after snack and before and after lunch., so continued on. 
As I said earlier, we have reappropriated spaces at the elementary level and we are in the process of doing the same walkthroughs. 
Now in the secondary buildings. 
We know it's going to be very difficult, especially for the cafeterias to be utilized the way that they typically are, because children cannot sit in those tables together. 
So moving in some desks, looking at classroom use all of those different types of things, but really at the elementary level. 
We will be using again if we're going on full return for all students. 
Right now in elementary school, we would be looking to utilize our music space, our art space, and so therefore, those special areas become pushing for our students. 
We have worked with those departments and we'll continue to work to make sure that they have everything that they need for their lessons and equipment. 
Cleaning of all buildings will occur daily in the evenings in each classroom. 
We will also provide hand, sanitizer, wipes, gloves and any sort of spray bottles and wipe offs for for our staff and or students who feel encouraged to clean in between applicable filters have also been changed in our classroom events. 
We will also look to open up our windows and our doors where we can. 
Obviously you know the reverse was safety making sure that your doors were always locked. 
Your windows were always closed. 
Now, we're being encouraged by the department of health to use fresh air when possible. 
So we will look to do that prior to it becoming too chilly up. 
Isolation areas have been identified in our buildings, and so, if a child is it has any sort of of symptoms or they come to school 
and they have not filled out the health screening. 
Those students would be placed there so that we can offer a temperature check and make sure that everything looks okay before we send them down to their classroom hygiene protocol visuals will exist in all buildings if they're not there. 
Already and again I share those with you at the end of our presentation so that you can see them. 
We will also be having routine hygiene drills much in the same of how we have regular school building drills at this time. 
Unfortunately, no visitors will be permitted in our schools. 
We just cannot provide enough secure measures for our staff and our students, and so again we will be limiting all visitors. 
Both traditional fire and hygiene. 
Drills will be conducted elementary snack and lunch will be in the classroom to minimize flow and secondary lunch. 
It may be in the cafeteria and alternately in the classrooms. 
We will also rotate any outdoor areas so for recess any of those other matters classes will be rotated on the game field, the basketball court, let's say, for example, and in our playgrounds students, are encouraged to bring their own water bottles. 
We do have bottle filling stations in all of our buildings. 
Our water fountains, unfortunately, will have to be closed at this time.
, so just some additional elementary return details that we wanted to share with you. 
You know it's always tough to start with health and safety, because again we don't want it to sound, like our students are returning to jail, but we do want to make sure that our students and our staff feel safe for the return. 
But know that, on top of everything that we are doing, the social emotional well-being of our students is of the utmost importance to us, as well as of our staff, and we have surveyed students and we are looking to survey further the rest of our staff to just find out what are some of those underlying issues or concerns that people have. 
So we can ensure that we have our mental health staff there for supports. 
Unfortunately, we we will have to stress that students may not share materials. 
At this time, students will be assigned their own independent, math, workbooks and guided reading baggies will be provided weekly so that we have time to interchange them out clean them up and leave them for the weekend, so that there's a two to three day lag before the children pick up a new baggie and in those items we will integrate. 
As always in our literacy and our math, our science and social studies, topics whenever possible, this will be in addition to the strong direct instruction that our classroom teachers provide. 
Already all all students will be benchmarked for their ela and their math to identify their present learning levels. 
Curriculum will be retard as needed. 
We definitely know that this will need to occur for math, and we have provided some slides in the past that show you that we're fortunate we created our own math curriculum here a couple of years back 
and we know the the one to two units that each grade level will probably need to go back to so that, if I'm coming into second grade, I'm certainly not going to be able to start on my second grade. 
Math curriculum I'll need to be re-taught, some of the materials from when I was in first grade and for literacy. 
Once the teacher knows the collective levels of what they have in their room, they will be able to accommodate those literacy. 
Lessons around that art and music will be a push in again to minimize the flow, and we are currently working with our art, music departments. 
This is one that was a really tough hit. 
Music has to be 12 feet. 
Apart for any coral or any sort of wind instruments, we are working our hardest with that department. 
We are very fortunate here. 
We have a very strong music program and we do not want to see that diminish, 
and so we are looking for ways to think out of the box in order to be able to offer course opportunities that might be in smaller sections and different ways to offer lessons as well, but we have provided and are keeping all lesson areas in the elementary schools, so that students can still maintain lessons as needed. 
Physical education will be a mix of separating two classes. 
Typically, that are adjoined, so one class will be in the gym. 
One class will be outside and inclement weather they will rotate between the gym and in the classroom.
, mr butel and miss mcentee have reworked their curriculum to ensure that all team sports will be done in the spring, so all of those units will be taught in the spring and in the beginning it will be more personal. 
Fitness. 
Traditional grading will also return for our students. 
While we know that there may be some interruption in terms of what model our students may have to face, where we hear rumors that we may have to go to distance learning sometime later in the fall. 
We fully believe that by using google classroom no matter what we will be able to make that seamless transition to distance learning should we 
need- 
and we are well prepared, as opposed to when the crisis first happened, and most school districts were really just grasping at straws, but 
we also know that the accountability is something that is very important to our students very important to our community and especially to our students who are at the high school level. 
As I said before, google classroom will be utilized for communication at both the building principle and classroom teacher level. 
We really want to make sure that parents are on one medium so that they can see any communication, email messages, lessons etc, and at this time we are going to enforce, to ensure for the safety of our staff and other students that any sort of instruction that is done on google classroom or virtually that our students adhere to our district code of conduct. 
When students this year sign on families sign on to look at schedules, they will be asked and prompted to sign off on certain measures around this. 
I just wanted to share with you some of our pictures that john and I took as we went around in our walkthroughs. 
These are some samples of our our elementary classrooms. 
Again, they're, not decorated, yet, of course, but you can see that we have removed a lot of the traditional. 
You know, wonderful items that we would see in a classroom, but again we really wanted to maximize space and ensure that the teacher had space in the front of where their smart boards are and then also making sure that kids had room and were not. 
You know pushed up too too much, so we still are adjusting that once every single classroom is created at the building level, we will be returning mr o'keefe and I, with our team, to just ensure that everybody has space both the teacher in the front of the room and then students around. 
So again, we are fortunate here. 
We do believe that we have enough staff to move forward and should the numbers for remote learning ensure even more flexibility. 
We may be able to open up more sections in our elementary schools and at our secondary levels, bringing back more secondary students. 
This is at one more of the elementary school and to the right there. 
You will see a classroom at the secondary level.. 
This particular sample is where we marked it the a and b desks, so that students will be sitting 
and then it will make it a little bit easier for cleaning at night for our custodial staff.. 
This is this is also a little bit of a tough share here, because I know that we've been getting a lot of questions about child care and upk. 
First, child care: we are still going to be providing am npm child care by boce by scope, educational services. 
They continue to offer right now child care throughout the pandemic for our essential workers, and they are happy to move forward to offer this services for all of our students. 
At this point, though, we are on hold for our upk program, and that is not because we don't have the space or we don't want to, but we simply have not received the allocations yet from the state, and that is how we are able to run our our upk program. 
While we do have many students who do a tuition based into the program, it is simply not enough to substantiate the program. 
Should we not get the allocations, so we are advising parents at this time. 
I know I've. 
I've answered many phone calls many emails if you are need, if you need care, if you would like your child to go to an alternate preschool now is the time to seek that out just to be safe. 
However, if we were to find out about the allocations tomorrow, we would also be able to implement that. 
You know moving forward, so we have not changed anything we're not changing any spaces at this time
, we're just kind of on a standstill but to be safe. 
We just encourage you to look just in case. 
Excuse me, ms hines, yes. 
Actually, since we last spoke earlier today, I spoke to mr duffy, he's the executive director of scope and runs our upk program just trying to see if he's heard anything further about the program 
and he has not heard much more than we have. 
As a matter of fact, there was a meeting earlier in the day with the suffolk county, superintendents, as well as mr wix who's, the regional superintendent for eastern suffolk boces, to see what boces knew about upk funding and again their contacts in albany have been very, very quiet on it. 
The only information they've received is, you know, floating a balloon from albany that they're considering opening upk up, but they may only fund it at 80 percent of what the grant would be. 
So that would mean if the district wanted to move forward. 
That would be an expense that was not budgeted for and we'd have to make a determination. 
You know to take those monies from elsewhere to support the program, so it sounds like they're getting closer to a final decision, but I'd have to keep the border prize, so it might be a model in which we'd have to support 20 of the program to make it move forward. 
So I'll keep you posted on that. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe,, and then on to now our boces cte program. 
So those are our students because we do have two. 
We have cte programs that we house ourselves. 
They will still remain on the a b schedule, but the but the bose cte programs, where students get on the bus and go to boces. 
Boces did alert us last week that they will be providing that in house they do have the room so that will be live every day and for those students we will still have busing from our high schools to and from the program. 
We at this time, though, say that we may need family support in terms of if your child might need a ride to school if they are going to the program in the afternoon or alternately. 
That is, that is not solidified. 
Mr o'keefe and mr savone are looking at that through transportation to see if we might be able to accommodate and pick up individual students at their homes. 
That would only be for those choosing remote learning right. 
Only those choosing remotely. 
Thank you,,. 
So here I just. 
I share the hyperlinks that you will see on on the presentation that that we've sent home for the sake of time, I'm not going to go through all of these links, but the top is a sample of our health screening form and the bottom of our all the protocol visuals a sample of them that we have smattered around every single building and so for our next steps. 
As we said this morning, we finished our planning committee meeting where we laid out the the final steps here with our district leaders and our volunteers. 
Our board of education, pres presentation is, is now as you can see, and then we also have a live community forum on monday at seven o'clock and we will be live streaming it. 
Similarly here, however, I would envision that we would be a little closer that so that you can see us a little bit more clear, but on friday we will be sending out a survey just asking community members for questions that they have. 
We will collate those into subject areas and we will look to our best answer. 
Any questions that you have as well as our building administration will be delivering a common q, a sort of like fact sheet about further details pertaining to to the buildings, and this will include sample schedules for all of our students- orientations how those will go out for our grade six on our grade nine. 
Some of that will be virtual and some of that will still be activities just broken up into smaller increments at the building, as well as arrival and dismissal times and bell schedules for secondary students and then, lastly, as governor cuomo had ordered on friday, we are in the process of updating our district website for protocols for any symptomatic individuals testing. 
We are not responsible per se for testing ourselves, but we are responsible for offering a plan. 
Should a student or a staff member go home, they are required to go, get testing where that could occur, and then, of course, they can't come back into school until testing results have been provided and then contact tracing as well.. 
So that is the end of our presentation this evening. 
We look forward to speaking and sharing some more and clarifying more for you, as the rest of the night goes on and then on monday, as well at seven o'clock. 
Did I my apologies. 
Let me go back. 
I 
I didn't realize that I think I got caught up in what we were saying about upk before, 
so my apologies. 
These are some additional details about our secondary return and again, with the utmost priority being the social and emotional well-being of our students. 
In grades. 
Six to eight we will be benchmarking for eli. 
We do that through a literacy management system that we have and also for math. 
All of our math departments have benchmarking type assessments that they do in the beginning of the year and again this will be to identify present learning levels in grades, seven to 12 curriculum adjustments may be made for applicable areas where prior learning needs to be had so, for example, in our math and our science classes, there may need to be some learning from the prior year's regents bearing class, and so we would be looking to look at curriculum around that and possibly offer review classes for our students as well again, traditional grading will return. 
Students may not share, so we will be limiting textbook use and we'll be taking advantage of all of the online subscriptions that we have physical education again. 
Very much like elementary school will be a mix of the gym outside fields and other large area use instrumental lessons very similar to elementary. 
We are working with that department to ensure that lessons will occur. 
They do need to be 12 feet if they are wind and or choral in nature, and again we will be looking to figure out ways in order to still offer those choral groups, but in a modified version google classroom will continue to be utilized for communication with both the principal and the classroom teacher again for a seamless transition 
should we ever be ordered into distance learning. 
Lockers will mostly be used for am and pickup only that's not to say that if a student really needed to go back, we would not allow them to, but again just trying to minimize the flow and minimize how much our students are putting into the lockers. 
So we would envision some form of outerwear, that's appropriate for that time and modified or or very. 
You know slight binders and or folders notebooks that they need stagger grades again in times of at the end of the period. 
We would be announcing grades so that they can come out into the hallways, so that would mean that we would be at the end of the period starting it a little bit earlier, so that we can allow each grade level to disperse into the hallway to their next period.
, sorry about that. 
So that still is the end of our presentation. 
We hope that this did clarify some further information for you. 
We are appreciative of the support and the time that the community offered us to be able to digest everything and wait for the orders, so we can bring this to you tonight. 
Thank you. 
Questions from the board questions from the board. 
Is anybody, jim, a john on the upk right now? 
The way that's funded is. 
Correct me. 
If I'm wrong, like a six hundred thousand dollar grant, primarily we get a six hundred thousand dollar grant. 
We hold a lottery that allots 252 families a spot in the program we have more interest than that annually, but families beyond the 253 are able to participate for the same rate, which is about twenty four hundred dollars per family for the year. 
So if, if the governor would give us 80 percent of that, that would mean that the district would have to come up with a hundred and twenty thousand dollars correct. 
But are you in that hundred twenty thousand dollars? 
Are we counting that that the lottery people are not paying tuition? 
That would still be the lottery people not paying right, so, in other words, the 120 000 could be reduced if the lottery people were willing to pay a tuition fee.
, that was a model the board chose to go with.
,, thank you just to figure back on what security was saying if they were to to to. 
Take twenty percent of that we'd be looking at about 479 thousand. 
Two hundred is what we'll be looking at, which is what accommodate 201 kids. 
You were saying that you were concerned that we, we might not be able to raise the funds to be able to. 
You know, manage the program and have enough you know what I mean. 
You'd have to redo the lottery. 
Then I I wouldn't I don't know. 
If would necessity, would you want to use the same number then cut it off?
, I set off at just 201 and then and then open it up at 237.69 per per family per month. 
We could examine any model that the board wanted to take a look at. 
Certainly those other families had already been notified that they were among the families chosen for the free program. 
That's the worst. 
The worst case scenario would be correct, but let's say they take all the funding and, and they don't and one of the concerns to have it 
I mean have we thought about reaching out to some of our state elected officials, flanagan or doug smith, to find out if they can get us clarification from the governor's office as to whether or not he's going to fight, we can certainly continue to reach out. 
Quite honestly, during much of this crisis, much of them have been rather silent. 
We haven't been able to get a lot of information. 
The governor isn't sharing much with other people other than when he decides to put it out via press conference, I mean. 
Normally, our local representatives are very helpful in getting information for us. 
Unfortunately, hadn't been able to get information for us, but it's certainly worth trying. 
I mean we're two weeks before the start of school 
and you've got 252 families, not knowing whether or not they have a pre-k. 
I mean I don't know
, you know how the board feels, but I personally think that you would get 252 families, even if they took all 599 000, because at 237 a month for half day pre-k, it's still a great great opportunity sure- 
and I can't and now more than ever 
and and would be willing to work with us if there was zero funding 
and we had enough participation to still run the program. 
would can we include something like that in the survey sits some of the families out there to see what the interests would be. 
We could do a separate survey. 
I wouldn't want to you know not on the same survey. 
put it out as a separate survey, specifically targeted to those families that are already in the process. 
I have a follow-up to that. 
Where are we putting all these students if our classes are maxed out at this time we still have not reappropriated those classes. 
We do have a couple of buildings because of additional special education sections that we needed, that we moved the classes, but we have not taken away those class spaces. 
Yet so, if we were to go with the will of the board to you know, put out a survey and go with a tuition base, we would be you know all set to go: hi. 
I just had a quick question about the bus and what is the busing going to look like I mean again, it'll also depend on participation. 
You know we put out a survey to the parents a week or so ago. 
I think we had nine thousand respondents in in very brief order. 
in that survey about a third of the families considered, possibly keeping their children home of the two-thirds willing to send their children in 65 of those 
said they would use the bus. 
The other 35 said they would drive their children to school. 
So just some quick, math you're only looking at say, 4 500, kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers. 
I mean they could change when we put out the new survey, and it could be that you know parents first stop that they don't want to use the bus and then during the year. 
Maybe they start. 
You know they need the bus. 
So we're not reducing the number of bus runs. 
All the runs that have been budgeted for would be running, but with those numbers you'd end up literally with just about one child per seat. 
You know so 
and then you also take into account remote 
you'll get routed for 44 students. 
So in the worst case scenario there could be two pupils in each seat, but based on the information we're receiving, I don't think there'll be that participation.
, just some clarification so with the custodial staff cleaning each night, so they're going to have more to do than they did prior. 
Have we increased the custodial staff since their job description will be different to do a more deeper cleaning every day daily versus. 
Unfortunately, that was one of the items that was pulled back on the budget, so obviously we may need to take a look at that again we were rating 10 custodians and then, when there was issues where we even today, we still don't know what our state funding is and we still have the potential of a looming. 
20 percent cut, we decided. 
If you remember back to january and february, we were talking about this. 
We were adding one extra custodian, each building right. 
That was one of our enhancements for this year's budget. 
We did draw that back, so we're going to work with the staff. 
We have work with the substitute staff we have, and you know it as best as possible to optimize cleaning, and then with the secondary schools, where you have the a b desks next to each other. 
So that means, if I am an a student and I sit in only the a 
and then the next day, the b desk comes in. 
That image might change, though I was going to say that that was really more so that we can show a visual to the families, how we were spacing it out in the beginning, those desks we would see needing to be reappropriated and put into our our lunchrooms different other areas where we're going to need to reappropriate other space, the library different items like that. 
So I don't. 
I don't necessarily think we were just at north today and in the classrooms that we walked around in with miss trombetta. 
There was only about 15 to 16 desks in in each classroom: okay. 
That was an initial setup when we were trying to figure out what it would look like or how we could divide them up. 
But in fact, with the style of cafeteria tables, we have it. 
It really prohibits the number of children that can eat in the cafeteria. 
We believe we're going to take all the cafeteria tables out of those secondary cafeterias and store them and put in desks. 
I mean it's not going to be the most attractive. 
Lunchroom 
it'll be set up more like a testing room where children will be spaced six feet apart right with classroom desks correct, but we do anticipate that we would be able to offer breaks, for you know, students to be able to go outside and go into any of the recreation areas, items like that elimination and so then in the secondary schools. 
If the kids are changing classrooms will the desk get wiped down between each change or how does that work in the cafeteria?
,,, not in the classrooms that would that would technically be not possible. 
I mean there's 3 000 desks in high school and 1600 or so in in a middle school. 
That just wouldn't be the means in that four or five minutes of passing to wipe down those tables. 
But if we student would want to do their own destiny, the materials will be in the classroom right. 
We are providing that for every classroom. 
and then one last question.
, everybody! 
It's okay! 
If a staff or a student happens to test positive, that would then be reported, and then the cdc would guide us on what we had to do or we have our own plan. 
How does that work? 
The department of health, the department of health department of health? 
So they would tell us so if it's one student in one classroom right that may be different than a student in a middle school who passes through a hall or mrs clayton's, become an expert on the matter.
, so the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require us to make reports for certain things and they require the medical treatment provider. 
The doctor who's performed the diagnosis for a positive result to report information to reporting for contact tracing. 
So therefore, our obligation we go above and beyond to make sure that, even if, for some reason, the medical treatment provider has not contacted the contact tracing, we will just check you know belt and suspenders that we have provided some insight in case 
there's an instance. 
The other thing is when the lab results come back. 
The lab results are supposed to be also provided to the contact tracing, at which point the department of health would be or enter cdc would be contacting tracers and determining who they would contact, including students or staff or family or whoever they came into contact with. 
Can I can I pick you back on that question quick?
, thank you very much so on the checklist that we do daily. 
Let's just say rob 
and I are in a classroom 
and I find out that he test positive for covid the next day when my parents are filling out the check sheet 
and it says, have you come in contact with anybody? 
That's tested positive? 
Will that prevent my entrance into the building? 
If you're saying you tested positive, if you're saying you're tested right?
, I mean, I'm, not gonna, tell you that rob testifies we're not allowed to tell you 
I mean I came to learn it. 
It becomes common knowledge of who it was, and now I have to honestly fill out the sheet 
I mean I'm have to now have to say.
, I did come into contact with some of the department of health guidelines for close contact, and this is where it gets a little squirrelly because you know
, are we in close contact? 
Are we in close contact? 
Their criteria for close contact is less than six feet for 15 minutes or more, so we'll have to look at each of those one at a time, and I can foresee the department of health as soon as schools open, you know, becoming overwhelmed with calls from districts all around the state just trying to get feedback and answers
, so we're building criteria and protocols with our nursing staff with our personnel staff. 
You know, so we can make some of these decisions on our own. 
We have handled situations already, even during summer school programs. 
So it's not that we're unfamiliar with how to do it. 
We've had staff members with with covid, so it's just going to be on a bigger scale. 
Now, that's all, and also just to mention, mr block is with us this evening from ingram and smith. 
He has been our one of our main contacts that we've been triaging information between the state, the federal, what we have in our schools, what we can do and what we can't do and trying to find the best scenario for our students and our staff 
and we'll continue to do so, and I promise this is my last question. 
So if a parent chooses the remote learning,, they have to commit to that for the year. 
They can't change their mind like after the first marking period, they're committing to that 
and then their student cannot participate in, let's say spring sports,, so, I think in in the beginning of the guidance, it said that students may not be able to may not be able to enter into activities or sports. 
We know now that that is not the case and that if a child is remote, they're still a student of ours, we're not really going to have any activities. 
So we don't foresee that being an issue. 
So it's really more for sports, but miss trombetta who sits on. 
The community. 
Four section has shared with us information in terms of how they're looking at that language and how we would not be prohibited most likely from keeping children back from sports in september, and then the child plays a spring sport and then come the spring. 
Sports are up and running and you tell the child they can't play, and just know that when we write that we're looking to make it more of a commitment that could be up to a year. 
That is because we don't want to give the misnomer that if a child says, I want you know a family to say that they want to be remote in a week 
and then they change their mind. 
They want to do it another week. 
We will look at each case, but it would be very challenging for us to bring back large numbers of students who think who feel they might have made a poor choice, because that would shift all of our classrooms and all of our teaching staff.
, I would totally agree with that. 
I just didn't know if it would be like after every marking period reevaluated, but if the parent does commit, I just don't want to hurt the student of course by saying. 
If extracurricular comes back in spring, your parent made this choice in september, and now you can't participate right 
and- 
and I think for us, you know being just of mine- 
that things could shift very easily. 
We could look to look at that come january 
and it may not need to be a year-long commitment, but we did want to write it down so that parents were aware all right. 
Thank you very much. 
Thank you for sharing this with us. 
I have two questions or concerns. 
When this plan was developed to return to school k through five the ada b day, it wasn't based on surveys that went out as to the number of parents that think they would choose remote or not choose remote. 
It was based on our entire population.
, so conceivably, if we have a, a 6 through 12 model of a day b day, hypothetically every parent said, I want my kids to return to school. 
We can. 
We can accommodate all of them in an ajb day. 
You mean physically back into school.
, we wouldn't be able to do that. 
How would we physically bring them all back? 
We don't have so at the elementary level, just very simple, math. 
We have to take out about five to six, seven kids out of each classroom in order to be able to accommodate that average size. 
My question a little bit on the six through twelve model--,, it that was based upon returning every single child to school. 
So if friday, the survey is if we have if we have more children now 
I understand you. 
Thank you. 
So if we have more children who are going to be on remote, we could conceivably- 
and I know we discussed this this morning in our committee- 
we could look to bring back more students. 
My question is that my concern is the same as laura is having a one-year commitment. 
I received a half a dozen phone calls today,, probably in the last couple hours about I'm concerned about the one-year commitment we know., that you know in remote learning it says remote instruction is not equivalent to 
in-person hybrid instruction right
, so it's not the same level right so for forcing kids out of school. 
What we're doing is we're creating a bigger educational gap for the following year.
, we're not forcing that would be a parent's choice, but the thing is we allow them to come back after each quarter.
, if we're able to accommodate them according to the way the plan was designed. 
Why wouldn't we allow them come back after after one quarter, so they can get that? 
I didn't think we said that we wouldn't be allowing we said that it would be really prohibitive for us to be able to reschedule them back into classrooms, but we could look at it based on the numbers that we have. 
We wanted to be honest, mr scavo, and let families know that this could be a year-long commitment, and most districts are looking at that at either january or the year long, because it is very disruptive that would mean having to up just move around the entire schedule for. 
You know our schools, which we may still have to do, should covert restrictions be lifted, but you wouldn't want to recant, and we know that that happened quite a bit where, in the beginning of all this debacle, we were putting out information and 
then something you know, alternatively, was shared, but I think we just said before with miss slattery, that, of course, if we could look at it by quarter and we felt like it wasn't going to be a tremendous feat for our families that we would do that. 
But I think that that's not probably what a parent is going to make their choice on if I'm choosing to be remote. 
It's because I'm thinking that it's unsafe for my child to be at school. 
So I'm hoping that by these presentation, slides that we have people will see that we've made tremendous tremendous. 
You know strides in making sure that our schools are safe, they're, clean 
and we're doing routine protocols to ensure that, but the commitment is a year. 
That's what this time for right!!, so if something changes at home a person, that's furloughed now has to go back to work right
, they want to and their their impression is going to be that they can't return because they signed the paper saying that they have a one-year commitment to be at. 
But I mean I think, though if, if there's something along those lines- 
and we all get those calls all the time, if there's a family, that really is in enough need and feels like they made the poor choice or not a poor choice. 
They made the wrong choice for what their their thing is. 
Going on right now, so whether a parent goes back, furloughed or their child is just not doing well in remote learning 
and they were to contact us just like any other parent phone call that we would have. 
Of course, we would look at every case individually, but I'm talking as a whole. 
We could not say you're going to be a remote and then, if you choose to decide in masses that you want to come back, we just would not be able to run the same schedule 
and then we would be restarting everything over again. 
The reason why I bring this up is: I watched the the newsday webinar yesterday we had dr johnson. 
I finally heard all about him. 
I got a chance to see him in the presentation, along with a psychiatrist along with a the superintendent of north babylon, and that exact question came up right and a lot of the experts were saying. 
I would not go past a semester. 
In fact, a lot of districts are going quarterly, you know- 
and I just don't. 
I just don't want to influence a person's decision because they're fearful that, if they sign that paper they're not going to be able to come back because the reality of it is, is that you know when we look at the education of even a day b day. 
My concern is that, as a teacher, you can't teach the entire curriculum and now we're talking about prior learning being re-taught from the previous year, how you and you're never going to be able to teach the the entire curriculum, but the kids that at home that are not getting the same. 
Equivalency of education are going to be further behind the following year and 
which all we're going to do is create a a snowball effect 
and that's my concern. 
I mean you know I personally would like you know the opportunity that, if they, if they come back after, if they're the first quarter, which is a 10-week period or nine-week period, I think it would be a little more settling for the people in the community. 
Knowing that all, this remote's not learning I committed to a year now, I'm stuck well, 
I mean, I think I think two things right, because I agree with you. 
I don't think anybody wants to be in the position where we can't welcome back students interchangeably as they need, and we definitely know that, no matter what happens. 
Curriculum is going to be interrupted this year. 
That is a safe bet right, but if we play, if it's the will of the board, if it's the will of the board to change that- 
and you would like to make that language more flexible, we're happy to do that. 
But know that we've taken, you know quite a concealed amount of time to making sure we would prefer our students not to be on remote, but if a family really chooses and needs to choose that we honor and we respect that absolutely. 
But, I mean nobody wants to do that, but nobody's the size of sagem either, and so we have different restrictions. 
That's why the question was the plan design based on the entire it was. 
It was based on of if all students were going to be a full return, then we would have to go in an a b day if we are finding, though, that we have remote students at a quantity where we can bring back students even an additional day or or by grade level seniors. 
First, ninth graders. 
First, you know. 
However, we look to plan through that. 
Then that's would be our next step. 
So just what we were saying earlier in our remote instruction, it's going to be hard to match up what exactly the model will look like until we have the survey results from our teachers and for our families, so we can match it up certification-wise. 
My biggest concern is we have kids taking ap exams and getting those kids ready for that and getting those kids ready for the next level college. 
You know we. 
We have training as much face time with with staff. 
It's absolutely. 
I agree with you 
and I'm very 
I'm very thankful. 
You know working with the scta if we ever have to think about distance learning the fact that we'll be providing two and a half hours every day for our students so running the same schedule, just shortened periods. 
You know working on google classroom interchangeably now and consistently across all of our classrooms. 
You know just right now. 
Currently we have a tremendous amount of teachers that are undergoing, virtually to ensure that everything is is up and running and that they feel clarified and supported in that kind of work, but you're preaching to the choir. 
I couldn't agree with you more that this is a really challenging time. 
I have a high schooler myself 
and she's in a smaller district, doing an a b schedule. 
So I scratch my head a lot right now, so I I completely respect and understand and if the board would like us to look at the year-long date, just let us know 
and we'd be happy to accommodate.
, this this will go the, remote learning actually just went out. 
That survey just went out, but we can I mean I could send it on on. 
On remind in five minutes, if we wanted to say you know that we've changed the date, but it sounds like. 
Maybe that needs to be more of a discussion if we're looking to go that route meredith engine and then jimmy so on the remote learning. 
If a parent were to choose that model, I understand that we would want them to commit for the full year, because we are devoting staff just to that remote learning right we're not using a teacher who may be inside the classroom, sometimes we're going to utilize the staff that, for whatever reason, has to be staying at home to be our remote teachers. 
That's the optimal plan right, so at the elementary level, it works a little bit easier in that in that fashion. 
If I'm an elementary teacher and I'm out, I can conceivably teach any of those grade levels if I'm a librarian, obviously that certification, et cetera et cetera, it gets a little trickier at the secondary level, because if I'm a chemistry, teacher and and I'm out- 
and maybe I don't have as many students out for chemistry- 
you know- 
then what am I giving to that teacher in terms of work that they would be doing for that day. 
So one could say that she would switch what they're doing and now they're going to teach more science electives and they can support any of those students who are out needing science electives. 
So it's really going to boil down to looking at the hard numbers of students matched up with the teachers that we have. 
Should we not be able to match everybody up which I'm hopeful we will be able to, then we would need to start entering into some sort of live streaming or larger groups of google classrooms, where a teacher, instead of having a class of maybe 25 or 26 in a google classroom, we may have to have larger numbers, and so then that's why the year-long decision, or not doing it every quarter becomes very challenging for us. 
If I'm a teacher and I'm running a google classroom of 45 kids and 
now some that those classrooms want to go back, what classroom are they going into? 
Where am I fitting them into 
so then you're having to change people's schedule? 
It's a lot of moving parts, it is and 
then, if, so we have so children are able to through their parents, choose whether they want to come back to school or not. 
Our teachers are not electing whether they're coming back to school. 
The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning are the teachers that have reasons why they cannot return, and so, even if tomorrow, you know three weeks after school started, all of our remote learners said well. 
This is for the birds. 
I don't like this. 
I want to go back to school. 
We wouldn't then have the ability to bring them back, because, even though we did the classrooms for them, we wouldn't at that point, have the ability. 
Would we not at this time, because again, with six feet, we are, you know down to the amount of numbers that we have, but if, if our numbers look as such, where the remote learning is a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms, let's say, for example, instead of them being 17, that might only be 13 or 14. 
So then we could start welcoming them back, but that would be based on almost you know, looking at each student individually and being able to see how we can schedule them back into school, which is probably a very physical impossibility in the next three weeks. 
It's a little hard with our secondary schools as a as a secondary mom. 
It is it it kind of does stink 
and there's no two ways about it: our children, no child, is going to get the best education this year. 
It's just not going to happen and something we're going to try our best 
we'll. 
Definitely try our best right. 
If one, let's say somerset had an influx of you know. 
80 percent of their kids wanted to stay home and remote learn that would open up a lot more room, but it wouldn't necessarily mean that we would do somerset where their children win every single day and the rest of them.
, we would be making decisions that are consistent for all students, but then we might be reappropriating staff to help out in other ways in other areas, and I don't want to put you on the spot, 
but it's okay. 
That's why we're here 
we're on the spot? 
Have we looked into sixth grade at all, because in my opinion sixth grade is that lost grade? 
It's a grade where they're a little too young to still stay home by themselves and not only just stay home for the day by themselves, but also teach themselves kind of you know get on this get on the schedule get on the computer. 
Do what you got to do? 
Keep yourself moving on that b day. 
Have we visited something that once we get all our numbers, because I know we can't really finalize anything until we get all these surveys and numbers, but once we get all those numbers, are we going to be able to maybe look at sixth grade going every day as a possibility?
, that's absolutely you know, that's definitely a conversation that we've been having as as soon as we know what the numbers are. 
Will we be able to welcome back additional grades, and I would I would assume that we would be having these conversations with with all of you, our administrative team, obviously as well and sixth grade is one of those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off at, because we know that they could be 10 11 years old going into school, and I would not feel comfortable myself at times, leaving my child home for long periods,, and so, we've had those conversations and once we know the numbers we'll be able to come back and report if we're able to make any changes good. 
Thank you. 
So much, no problem, just a quick question. 
Some clarification!, piggybacking a little bit on what mr scavo said. 
Are we entering the year making an assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver 100 of content in regards to secondary curriculum? 
If that is the assumption that I think you said that we're almost entering into, 
I mean who's going to choose what topics and 
what's being covered. 
Are we letting different teachers different people 
it just it concerns me that we're entering, I know
, there's no perfect answer 
and there's no scenario that can right that, under these circumstances that you've, given you 
but. 
I guess that makes more of mr scala's point is that if we're making the assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver content, we should be trying to wait till so many surveys come back and see how many kids we can actually get 
and. 
So no, I don't have a perfect answer for it, but I can tell you what we're doing to set up for that. 
I had a chair meeting a couple of weeks ago, so our instructional leaders in each department to talk about that, especially at the secondary level, and so we would be looking at our curriculum at what are the big ideas at the end of the school year. 
What is it that the students are expected to learn so they can. 
You know move forward and pass those classes and or regence exams, we're also hoping to have a little bit more guidance in terms of the state education department in terms of what they're going to do in relaxing standards and curriculum and testing so much in how they had canceled the regents. 
We don't hope for that. 
We hope more for choice so that these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents. 
If they want to take it and see what kind of grade they get, I don't
, I don't think we're looking. 
I don't think- 
and I know you mean it this way, but we're not assuming we're not going to be able to get through our curriculum, but we want to be real with our families. 
The curriculum could look a little bit different than what it normally does, and I know our teachers again hard workers are already looking at that. 
We've had some conversation, for example around science lab hours, usually that's seat time 
now the state education department has relaxed that, and that could be also a virtual. 
So we've already started those conversations once we come back into. 
Schools in our department means that we've been having anyway, virtually we'll continue those talks and start looking at that together. 
So this at the secondary level state the new york state, creates the standards for apn regions 
right so haven't. 
Given us clarification, okay, ap is through is through the college board, and so we actually are, starting, as you know, a new ap capstone program at the high school, so 
those teachers that are gonna begin teaching it for us this year they just went through the training for that and right now, ap is holding tight to what they're doing, but we also know that at the last minute they made some changes around what they did: testing wise, virtually. 
So we are advocating- 
and I think mr o'keefe spoke about this earlier- while we have not heard a tremendous amount from our legislators at this time we have been advocating, through our local boces, our associations talking to talking to the college board and just hoping for some teamwork for relief, so that families know that you know we're not looking to make any decisions that are going to make impacts for the students, but we also have to be real and they have to work with us. 
So we're hopeful for that. 
No problem, aaron, the so by the weekend we will have the figures on how many people are opting for remote learning. 
Is that,, all and the way we have it now is they're being committed. 
They can make a commitment for one full year, just just for my identification. 
Let's suppose it came back to say 30 percent of our district, one, which could be right, which could be what it could be sure. 
What does that change? 
Anything for us with the ab days or or or as meredith said, the sixth grade situation would, let's say, 30 remote for the year. 
Would that change? 
You know what we're doing right now.
, absolutely so what I just said with business. 
Also gonna take you know. 
Where is the thirty percent? 
It could be heavily weighted on the younger children.
, you know, is a k12 pet families deciding they want to keep them home right. 
You know it really depends on the breakdown of the of the groupings and the grades of where that 30 percent is or is it leaning more on one side of the district versus the other, it's not as clean as just if it was thirty percent, but, spaced across the district. 
That would make it easier. 
We can see some movement, I'm just not sure that I could say for sure right now that it would be at the secondary level. 
We would just need to see where it is and just aggregate that and just look at it, and it also boils down to to you know certification areas too, as well. 
How much staff we have in in each area? 
I fully understand mr scala's position on that. 
I really do understand, but I'm trying to trying to look at this, as if you put out a survey tonight which is already gone, but if you put it out- 
and it said your one mocking period 
and you could change your mind, 
then kind of I would say that you really we're stuck with what we've got this is. 
This is the way it's got to be because you don't know from market period of marketing period, how many students you're going to have. 
Is that accurate? 
I mean, 
but, 
but that goes to back to what we said. 
We can't put out there that you can make the decision after each quarter. 
If we're not sure we're going to be able to offer that- 
and so I know it may have looked like it- 
was a little bit stricter than it sounds like the board was- was willing to move forward with 
and so again we're certainly open to putting in alternate language, and we could send it as as quick as you know, as soon as we're done here or first thing in the morning. 
I certainly don't want to prohibit anybody from not doing remote learning but again, it's it's. 
We have to be practical in the size of our school district, so we can't say we're going to be able to offer things that smaller school districts can right away, but it is prohibitive based on on the numbers. 
So,, we might be able to offer that 
and we might be able to offer more grades into our secondary schools. 
We might be able to offer more space for our elementary students. 
We just won't know until we see all of those numbers getting to getting that number that we're seeking this weekend will drive where we go next,, and that's why it's challenging to be able to share with our staff and with our community 
what remote learning will you know essentially look like as well? 
If I don't have enough staff, I can't guarantee that you're going to be in a google classroom with a live teacher. 
I might not be able to offer that it may be based on whatever elective or store or grade that you're in it 
could be some sort of like a live streaming, 
but but again it really. 
It depends on on the numbers of the students that we have up against our staff as well. 
Thank you, jim just just real fast to pick it back. 
I apologize. 
I walked out for a second, if only 75 of the families respond to the survey. 
So now there's 25 of the kids. 
We don't know what they're doing no the default is that they're coming to school.,! 
Thank you no problem, so I know with elementary the teachers. 
Usually take their lunch when the students have their lunch. 
How are we working that, if they're having a lunch in the classroom who will be supervising them so? 
We do have obviously aid support. 
We are also working with our principals because we know that we're probably going to need some additional help with that, but we also know that. 
You know that lunch is managed. 
I actually thought that there was some staff that was a part of the lunch periods that might be mistaken. 
I'd have to look at that, but we are. 
We are having conversation to ensure that we have the support we need for lunch, two more. 
Actually. 
What will clubs look like virtually? 
So that's that's another new and exciting question. 
We definitely know that clubs are not going to be able to be maintained after school physically. 
We have started to work with an online platform called passport for good and it allows clubs to run virtually and note on all their activities attendance community service hours if a child is working any of those types of hours. 
So we have to enter into conversation with our teachers about what that could look like. 
We certainly don't want to not offer clubs, but you know once a week twice a week: what sort of activities? 
How will you meet with them? 
Will google me be a part of it? 
Those are the questions that we're looking to have moving forward around clubs and one more with the staggered start times. 
Those are students still changing for gym class. 
We will not be changing for gym and we will not need to because we have moved team sports to the end and we're looking to do more. 
You know personal fitness that isn't rigorous, but we would not. 
We would not be looking to have any any. 
You know contact in that manner for our students [Music]. 
As I sat here tonight. 
I thought about saying absolutely nothing 
and I really don't know where to begin. 
I don't have a specific question. 
I can tell you that I'm incredibly angry internally right now 
and it's not at anybody in this room, but I thought that, I haven't organized my thoughts completely they're. 
Just bouncing around in my head, but I want to say a few things. 
First, I want to say that you did an outstanding job in the most difficult of circumstances. 
You've put together a plan. 
Every school district is in the same exact boat that we are in questions asked tonight by rob, alex laura meredith everybody here great questions, and we don't have the answers to any of those questions and we are going to be surprised. 
I think greatly by the things that we find. 
I think that you know people could look at what's going on here tonight 
and they may think that all of us agree on this model and think that this is what we have to do. 
I'm sure there are people watching this tonight streaming or we'll watch it later on 
and they'll think that if you're sitting here, I'm sitting here 
and I'm quiet that I must agree with this plan- 
and I think it's wonderful 
and I'm going to tell you that I don't 
it's rotten, it's a rotten plan. 
That's going to do tremendous damage to our children. 
I've been teaching for over 22 years. 
Now I can remember when I started there was goals 2000.
, maybe some people in the room. 
Remember that maybe you don't, then there was no child left behind and then most recently there was common core 
there's, never a time in which it seems like a bad idea, can't come about a bunch of garbage and nonsense that does anything but improves the education of our children. 
As I sat here tonight and I watch that slideshow 
and I watch those desks sitting so far apart. 
I thought what kind of dystopian period of time have we entered into where we look at this, and we accept this as the quote-unquote, what I hate to say the new normal
, it's not normal to me. 
It's not acceptable to me. 
I want you to know that if it were up to me solely, I would defy the governor. 
I would send all of our children back to back to school. 
I would give them that opportunity. 
I believe that his edicts are completely unrealistic in terms of delivering a sound education to our children and I believe they are not well-based in terms of research and data and so on. 
So when we look at how many children have ended up with covid 
and what's happened to them
, there's no question that covet exists. 
In my mind, I lost one friend to it. 
I almost lost a second several who had it very badly who thought they might lose their lives. 
So there's no question that covet exists. 
However, when I look at the numbers and when I look at children getting covered, what I see is that our response is disproportionate to what is going on and we are willing to just fall in line and listen to the leadership of this state, this country and do these things- 
and I know there are people who feel like me, and 
I know there are people who don't feel like me, a third of the survey respondents who have said I'm not comfortable sending my child to school, and I am all about parental choice. 
If you do not feel comfortable sending your child to school, then I encourage you not to 
I encourage you to homeschool. 
I encourage you to use the remote option if you're not comfortable with that. 
However, I feel, I've, been denied my choice, which is to send my child to school. 
I'm willing to tolerate that risk based upon what I know, because I think that the damage being done to my child that still is in in school and the damage being done to other children is tremendous. 
I taught remotely for the last what three four months of school and when I tell you that I did as good of a job as anyone could do with live instruction every single day. 
All right. 
I worked very hard to do what I did 
and I watched kids slide into the great abyss and some of those children that I watched slide are supposed to go off. 
The princeton this fall are supposed to go to. 
Cornell are supposed to go to. 
You know you name the school 
and and they're going columbia and so on. 
But yet I've watched each one of them slip 
and I've watched a few hold on, and I've watched the most needy students that I taught completely slip
, we're not getting that back. 
We are not, and here we are and here's where we're going 
so I'll leave on this particular note. 
Sometimes it's real easy to just go along 
and I feel terrible for people like you, folks, the administration here, it's simple 
and I'm in the same boat as an educator. 
It's my job! 
It's how I support my family and live my life and as a result of that, I'm forced to comply, because if I don't I'm out of a job but the solutions, we've come up with they're, not good solutions
, they're, terrible solutions, and they are solutions that are going to harm each and every one of our children. 
And at some point I do believe that people who feel the way that I feel are going to have to think long and hard about how we stand up and demand what we want for our children that we think is best. 
I just want to say before I ask my last two questions that was 
well said bill. 
I I feel exactly the same. 
We do so well said. 
I just want to talk about the boces, because we're also feeling some questions today about boces. 
As I mentioned earlier in the meeting community meeting where there was only 50 people in that meeting,, where there was only 50 people, there was 50 how many people 50 volunteers and then all of our staff as well go ahead.
, you know. 
Having worked for boces for going into my 29th year, you know over the decades things change school districts go to block schedule. 
Kings park did at one point: school districts for financial purposes, decided that you know we don't want to send two bus routes to boces. 
We only want to have one route and, as a result,, they basically said to our agency look whirly standing in the am this year, or will he sending seniors in the am and juniors in the pm 
and they've changed things so that it accommodated 
him and our bosses always accommodated him and my concern with some of the questions with some of the students that are in cte classes, that are that are scheduled to go to carpentry and auto body, 
and- 
and you know whatever other programs they signed up for- is that transportation becomes an issue if we have an a day b day, those particular subject areas you have to be there every day you can't teach somebody how to sand the fender and paint it remotely. 
It's just not something that can happen, so I suggested earlier that maybe we should call boces, eastern south post and say look we pay anywhere from 14 to 20 000 tuition depending on the particular student. 
If they have an iep or not or if they need additional services, we can only stand in the am because of the situation. 
We're in you know and get their feedback. 
You know, I don't believe we. 
I don't think they want to lose the tuition.
, I agree and and uh- 
and you know I did appreciate that idea, because I'm not I 
I know you're in western 
but it was just you know, shared with us, the model that they were running, 
and so we traditionally we're share we're told what our schedule is, but we are quite large 
and I agree with you- 
we pay an exorbitant amount of money into both season. 
It's certainly worth the conversation. 
The second thing we have in-house cte classes where we have cosmetology, 
and- 
and you know using the same concept- 
I mean if we have to get our kids there every single day. 
The suggestion that you know we've we've done in you know boces is that we try to allocate you know: 
the junior students first year, students the am session 
this way they could take that bus up every single day right and just have to get a ride home two two days out of the week 
and then the pm students or the second year. 
Students would actually attend cosmetology and pm because many of them may have driver's license and license. 
It's just another suggestion to be able to accommodate that population of kids. 
That really need to be there five days a week, especially cosmetology students that have licensing and all that stuff which, by the way our cosmetology teacher, I mean she. 
She really just went above and beyond to ensure that the kids had the experience they needed, even if it was virtually. 
So I agree with you 
and I do appreciate that feedback and 
then just the last thing is more of a more of a comment 
and it's frustrating because I I hear what bill saying I hear 
and if you don't mind, I really do. 
Mr coggins, I. I don't want you to think or anybody to think that we just you know, laid low because of our jobs.. 
I think everybody knows I came from a district where we stood very tall against things that were coming down from the state education department. 
I think when you're talking about health, it's a little bit challenging, but I hope you 
understand- 
and I hope everyone in the community knows that at no point did. 
I think that I was doing this just because it was my job 
but because I really do want what's best for children like
. 
I know all of us here, but I stand just as equally frustrated when you're out 
and you see people out and about in playgrounds and beaches and and whatnot 
and we're held to you know very different standards. 
But when I tell you that we're working 18, 19 20 hours to make sure we're given the best, I know it's not what we all want, but I do respect what you said 
and I really do appreciate that feedback. 
My last thing is really more of a statement and. 
You know when I look at the guidelines for opening in new york 
and it seems like they print a new one every week, because they change the rules so crazy,. 
You know you look at them. 
If I can say that you know john, when you said it was cryptic, it really is 
I mean you need to 
you know you can interpret this 50 differently.
,, but they have a mandatory column and then recommendations for best practices, which I don't understand, but it talks about ensure that social distancing, six feet at least six feet or a physical barrier is maintained between individuals while in school facilities on school grounds, including cafeterias, unless safety or care of activities such as moving equipment or elevating elevators traveling in common areas requires shorter distance of individuals. 
But then number two says: if social distancing is not possible, individuals must wear acceptable face governments, that's exactly how we interpret what we talked about earlier if we have to move kids back into a classroom. 
The way I interpret this- and maybe legal legal counsel, give me you know 
their opinion right is that if we had to move desks closer together, okay to be able to not be able to, you know, accommodate the social distancing by putting masks on the kids, we would be able to do that 
and that's exactly how we started out our planning. 
If you remember we had looked at, I think it was the massachusetts model where we were looking to at least go no less than three feet 
and when we did that it was like everyone's high fiving each other everyone's coming back. 
This is great 
and I don't mean to put mr block on the spot, but we did receive guidance from legal and it looked as though that masks were not going to be appropriate alone, but we read the regulations the same as you. 
It was just as disappointing when we found out that was not to be mr o'keefe. 
The other day, you'd mention that if we were able to go three feet, we could accommodate every student. 
Every kid come back. 
Every student we had every building make up a class for three feet, and so we were able to say that if parents felt safe for their children to return that we were able to do that 
our hands are very tied. 
In terms of that, and you know again, I don't mean to put you on the spot, mr black, but you may want to jump in then 
it was a few weeks ago 
where you know we thought that just mask face covering was going to be sufficient. 
If you couldn't maintain the social distancing, but then the governor's office came out and clarified that and said that you have to have that physical barrier 
and. 
So that then took away our what we thought was our ability to have face masks, but the face coverings are okay in the hallways and the bus.
,,, there's!! 
It's not that's!, nothing makes sense, but that is. 
That's that's what we're following so aaron. 
As we all know, I should have had a swivel chair, john I'm just saying. 
Should I have a swivel chair, as we all know, education is is not going to be pretty this year 
and we want to give our children as much as we can 
and we've spent so many years working on this educating the whole child and worrying about social, emotional. 
I'm, the most emotional person shouldn't be talking about this, but. 
So a couple of things, our most vulnerable, social and emotional. 
As we see little children adapt much better. 
You see a two-year-old in target with a mask on it's, not a problem.
, my teenagers find the mask, uncomfortable and, and so hours. 
Six through 12, in my opinion, are our most mentally vulnerable 
and I just feel like, because things are so different. 
Are they going to be able to just go down to the guidance counselor just go down to you know, or things like that like, where they want to just go. 
Take five minutes with the guidance counselor or even the school psychologist. 
Is that still going to be fully in place opened to everyone? 
Is there also? 
I know that. 
I know that over the the distance learning period last year that our sagem north chairs they they did a tremendous job. 
Having a google meet also are are things for mental health in place and then my other question is what does recess look like in in covid land in elementary? 
I think, because I think I lightly brushed over that. 
So I'm glad that you asked me about that because you know so 
last year was the big thing that we were taking away: five minutes from lunch and recess and see, there's always bigger fish to fry people. 
So, with that they're gonna be allowed to go outside 
they're gonna be allowed to run it all off. 
Are they allowed to play on the play gyms? 
Are they allowed to play ball with one another, or is it you're going to stay there and just run in place 
and you're going to stay there and run in place 
and? 
I mean, I think. 
Realistically they are children, we're going to do our best to set up so that it's a safe environment, but there's not going to be boredoms out there if they are playing ball. 
I can't tell you that we will they're going to be, as I said earlier, rotating between the fields that we have the playground equipment that we have and then the basketball courts, so we would obviously have equipment outside for that. 
We do have sanitizing stations that we will be utilizing for the students but again. 
You know, as I said I think in the beginning. 
We do not want our students to come back feeling we're in jail, and the first thing that we had on our slides was the social, emotional well-being of our students and I'm very proud of the program that we have built here, and we are just looking for unique ways whether it be virtual, more push in from our sel chairs. 
You know all project kindness, all of those things we'll still have them this year. 
They just may look a little bit different in terms of the mental health staff, ms graham and the office of student services. 
Now under the direction of mram better with ms graham, we will be deploying guidance counselor. 
All of those different all of those services are still in place, but we see ourselves doing more proactive lessons as students come in and more push in into our classrooms, so that students feel comfortable. 
We know the issues that we're seeing out there again. 
Our sel chairs have sent out a survey to our students at the secondary level, and I agree with you at the elementary level we're going to be doing more proactive, resiliency skill type of activities with them. 
Our health teachers for the past year have been building a health workbook for the elementary schools that are rooted in all the resiliency skills that we have been studying using the university of pennsylvania. 
So we're really excited about what we can deploy for our students, and you know it goes back to
, we are so worried about curriculum 
and we are we are. 
We are going to work to ensure that all big ideas as much as we possibly can until this is all over is taught, but our first charge is just making sure that those kids feel happy and safe and healthy coming in and our staff as well. 
Our staff has not only been teaching from home prior to the summer, but they also had their own issues that they may have been you know undergoing. 
So that is our number one goal here. 
Thank you no problem, mr keith. 
Mr science.. 
One of the important questions that was asked this morning was about safety and about how kids are wearing their masks on the bus they're getting off the bus and now they're walking into the building with their masks on maybe a hood on, maybe a hat on and they're not going to be as easily identifiable as they have in the past. 
One of the suggestions was to wear lanyards with maybe id cards. 
I'm just wondering what else. 
If there's any other suggestions, if there's, how are we gonna, I mean? 
Obviously health and safety is number one concern that that is a that is a major concern of not being able to recognize kids and especially, ninth graders, who are now new to the building. 
So we don't know any of them to begin with, and and sixth graders are now going in there. 
So there's going to be a lot of unfamiliar faces and even more unfamiliar with me.
, so not too unfamiliar only because we do have our transition meetings for all fifth graders going into the sixth grade and then all eighth graders going into the ninth grade, and we did those virtually over the past few months prior to the ending of school. 
So all teams at the high school level, in conjunction with their middle school and then middle school to elementary school. 
We met on every single student, not just some, but all so they were able to physically see a picture of the student talk about the student all of those things, so so we're hoping right that there are similar, some familiar faces coming in 
but, we had talked about this morning, the use of the student badges. 
We have never truly enforced the way that we need to now, but we would have to ensure that the students are maintaining that and showing that because they will be wearing masks as they come in. 
However, we are also spacing things out, so the kids aren't coming into school in mass quantities, so 
should, in fact you know, prior to all the badges coming out. 
You need to slip down just so. 
We can kind of recognize you put back up and go back in. 
I think we would feel safe and comfortable in terms of that, but we'll be working with our staff working with security and seeing what other measures that we can, you know put into place. 
John. 
I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that. 
Just to pick it back up. 
If we're going to have the kids wear their id cards just a matter of how fast can we get the idea?? 
That's 
the that's the only thing, and that's why I say in the beginning. 
We may just have to do the old-fashioned, put it down for a second, so I can see, 
but you know our staff is pretty astute and granted the ninth graders. 
We may not recognize them all, but we all you know. 
We know our students here 
so, that's obviously another concern would be now we have them wearing their id cards and of course, we all know that 10 to 15 of the kids are either going to lose them or forget them. 
Do we have a mechanism to reprint them in the building daily so that everybody has one? 
Thank you,, so just for the community, we we are able to duplicate that., thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss any other questions we moved on. 
I just wanted to make sure that we at least took a poll of where we stand. 
As on remote learning, did we want to take a poll and leave it at one full year of a commitment? 
Did we want to talk about a half year? 
Did we want to talk about a quarter? 
I think it's important that we do it now, so that we don't wait until last. 
Second and we're changing[Music]. 
I understand what rob was saying before about this. 
I'm just curious why it wouldn't be sufficient if we just changed the language to where we could evaluate if it were possible and 
had people understand that it could potentially be that long, but we could, of course, if situations allow we can, we can, we can shorten it and truncate the time period. 
Can I just ask a question to mr block: 
I mean I just just because I can foresee 
I'm sorry jim just because I can foresee something 
are we are we even legally allowed to tell somebody they're not allowed to come back? 
That's 
you know, that's a 
that's an unanswered question. 
You know and it's unprecedented from a legal standpoint, and 
you know I understand fully the operational issues from a legal standpoint. 
You're going to want to see more flexibility, because the concern is that family will say that being denied. 
My right education, it responds back, is no 
you're being educated, being educated remotely, but that's not the same type of education as an in-person education. 
So from a legal standpoint, I would recommend that there be some flexibility built in. 
I was actually going to state that if you were going to do that, still keep the year, but have a reevaluation the ability to be able to re-evaluate, as ms heinz said, that that's going to occur on a student-by-student basis.
, if there's a concern from a parent, but parents are maybe being a little bit, not almost misled, but don't not aware of the fact that there may be a re-evaluation, but that's something you may want to clarify, and you could do it in an interval period. 
You could do it. 
You know after the first quarter,, that's as a re-evaluation, for example. 
I mean. 
One of my concerns would be is that they realize what remote learning entails and they're like I. 
This is not what I signed up for we're not going live
, we're not doing this or not right, and then we get an influx of kids and now class sizes grow 
and we don't have the space to have everybody in. 
So I just I want to make sure that we have that flexibility, I'm sorry jim [Music].
, my position is 
I like what bill just said. 
My position was to get the true figures. 
The way it went out was probably the right way to go, so people aren't saying.
, I can experiment for a while 
and we never really get a true picture, but at the same time I think if you put it if the language was softened up to say, the possibility of a full year is real. 
However, you know there's going to be, independent cases that have changed, etc, etc. 
So we all know that we all know that this could all change, but to get the true figure up front. 
I think they have to be aware that this could be a full year of remote learning..
, that's just my opinion. 
and I apologize. 
I don't have the survey in front of me. 
I don't
, I think I said could be, but I don't recall, but we could certainly again put that out once we see the numbers and if, in fact we feel like, maybe families felt a little bit, it was too strong and they're, not really quite sure we can. 
We could send a call out. 
We could send out an email as quick as you know now, if we wanted to the reason why I asked that question is: is that we based that plan on every single student returning?
, we did so the issue is not space. 
The issue is scheduling.
, that's correct!
, so I view it as well and and because of the six feet right, you know obviously space because of that, but the six feet parameters is what allowed us to go to this plane to accommodate every kid. 
They should be right. 
So if we don't have all if, if not all kids return, then we will have more space, obviously and then can bring back more kids. 
So so the thing is like I said: the issue is not the space matter. 
You know the plan was devised based upon every single student returning and that's why I suggested you know, maybe doing it once you know one or four times a year. 
You know. 
For that reason, I understand that it could be a nightmare scheduling. 
if the restrictions aren't lifted, I guess we have 13 kids. 
In a seventh grade, honest math class 
and we're looking at a schedule, you're going to look at the section 
say all right put them in mrs smith's class or put them in correct.
, so you know the issue is that you have this. 
You have the space, it's just more of a scheduling thing, and I would imagine that if more and more kids come back from remote learning, we could reassign teachers to classrooms.
,, and- 
and that's the point 
right so in a year where we're already saying the curriculum's interrupted the day has been corrupted. 
That's the only thing that we wanted to minimize in the beginning and get a true account, because you don't want to be moving teachers around and upheaving schedules, but we can of course always hand select and. 
You know put students in as outliers who really do need to come back, but we didn't want to forget. 
I don't know who said it before. 
We just didn't want people thinking, I'm going to try it out for a week 
and if I don't like it I'll, go because we're just. 
That would be really good. 
A quarter you know, and that will give us enough time to do the planning and do the scheduling if we have, if we had to. 
I just think that the one year signing something this is one year, scaring out of people based upon the phone calls that I received today. 
So I guess we'll have to then decide. 
Are we doing flexibility? 
The flexible option, obviously is the best for everybody, but do we want to say one year or do we want to say by quarter, 
and I guess we'll vote on that. 
So if you want to do a full year, write it with flexibility, you can vote on that full year. 
Flexibility,, so just put we'll put our hands up 
and I'll just we'll count them all full year with flexibility or flexibility with re-evaluating every quarter.
, so, but maybe we could put what would be the best way to well. 
I think that what I suggested would be if you want to stay with the full year, but that you re-evaluate on a quarterly basis, because I just caution us to if we all of a sudden say flexibility, then people, you know I just we have to have a true account. 
School starts in two and a half weeks, and I 
I don't mean to be crafts about that, but we we really do, and 
so I think, mr black, the way that you had said it. 
I think you know it's a year, but we would be reevaluating it throughout the year for everybody. 
I 
I 
I like what he said. 
Does that mean?? 
I don't think that you're going to make that full commitment. 
I don't think you can quite frankly. 
So I think that the concern was being raised was that parents, under the impression that you know no matter what I do 
it's a year now
, if I commit it's a full year, that's not going to be the case. 
We're going to look at it on a quarterly basis. 
Again, it's change. 
There could be a week wake up tomorrow with an executive order which states that parents, you know, can make the choice on daily basis. 
You know so 
you know, so I. I think that what it's going to be is that the district will look at it. 
We're going to look at our operational needs, we're going to look at the parental needs and make you know an informed decision, but that the benchmark be on a quarterly basis. 
Would it help if we provided some sample language 
and then you're able to let us know if that language looks appropriate, because we can send that out. 
You know as quick as. 
You know sunday evening or monday morning for folks perfect. 
Thank you any other questions. 
All right. 
We are back in the agenda letter f approval of minutes. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr mike caruso second and by meredith opie. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried number two. 
We are in the visitors section public comment that pertains to the agenda. 
I'm just going to need those cards or, if you're going to call them, is fine too 
I'm going to call up the names we do have several. 
I just wanted to make a reminder announcement that the visitor section, the public comment is in fact a public comment. 
It's not a question and answer type of period, so I know that some of the cards that we are getting do have questions on them. 
I think possibly it's better. 
You know to if, if questions are asked, we can have them written down 
and we can take your email 
and we can have a response sent to you by email. 
If that's good or mr picarella, if you want, we can also include them in our forum on monday. 
That's fine right. 
I just think it would possibly be best to email or you know, speak with you separately regarding,. 
So the first gentleman, mr caputo, I'm sorry capuano, 
oh, my name is mike capuano. 
My daughter is brooke capuano. 
She goes to sagem, you have an excellent school here 
and you have an excellent school because you have the best teachers in the country. 
I believe, when you take the teachers away, you have a bunch of buildings here:,, to think that you're going to lock a child in a room with a bunch of books and 
if you could fast forward 10 years that, like a doctor or a lawyer, is going to walk out of that room. 
It's just not going to happen.
, now the main reason that we're all here is the six foot: six foot: six foot: six foot- 
that's all we're here for why? 
Don't we tell everybody that that's a farce? 
If you build the partitions around the desk, the six foot is not necessary and I called osha 
and I called the governor's hotline.
, if you build the glass petition, the teachers are worried. 
Also. 
I understand that if you build a glass petition against the front, the teachers could walk in the back and they would be behind the petition. 
711 protects their cashiers and they all come in when it's time for their shift 
and they're back there. 
Furthermore, the children could walk in behind their petitions and take their masks off. 
The teachers could be up there with the blackboards and take their masks off and everything would be back to normal. 
This is all we're all here, because we're refusing to build the petitions. 
You could take that desk. 
There's schools that have taken that desk 
and they divide it like this boom and boom 
and there's four children on that desk 
and it's totally legal you can be. 
When you put a mask on then or any kind of petition, they said you could be nose to nose. 
I was just in a restaurant that was so packed the booth, the person right behind me I turned around. 
I was looking right in his face. 
I called the hotline from there because- 
and they said as long as there's a petition, there was a petition in between the booths and the petition 
was only this tall. 
I was looking in the guy's eyes and 
they said there's no regulations for the height of the petition.
, so all we need is the petition, and all this is gone.
, second of all, second solution: why don't you just have the people that want to come into school and the teachers that want to come into school come in and the ones that want to stay home and the children that want to stay home stay home instead of forcing the ones that are horrified to come in to come in and the ones that are desperate to come back in. 
My daughter wants her teachers and she wants her school 
and she wants her friends.
, what? 
If all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in? 
Everybody who needed to came in to to help 
and they kept america going to mind odds that the schools are the only ones that let us down now, as this gentleman said these kids in five years, if we could fast forward to the ones that are starting now, they won't be able to read and write. 
I don't know how many people go to europe, but our kids already can't read and write. 
We are kids in college. 
That can't add this 
is the death knell of america. 
This is not some small thing here that you're deciding 
and there's no reason. 
These are guidelines. 
Schools all around you hop hog everything else open five days. 
This is your decision to do in the generation right here. 
Remember that this is the beginning of the end of america,,. 
We hope that they rescind this, but if they don't rescind this, this few years here will be known as the covid dummies. 
They won't make it into college. 
They won't do anything 
and there's no reason 
and. 
Lastly, I want to say, if you open the schools, why bother the first kid or the first teacher that gets covered you're going to close all of sagem? 
So this is all the foss all this money, the reopening programs and everything. 
It's all a big fuss,, it's it because this is being treated like the bubonic plague. 
Mr capuano, I'm sorry there's a three minute time limit.
, thank you. 
Studies all around the world have opened up. 
There's not one case. 
The ymca tracked their own tracing 40, 000. 
Kids, not one mr kevin. 
Thank you very much for coming. 
We appreciate it. 
Thank you so much for listening 
and I wanna say. 
Lastly, the governor said this is for us to talk not three minutes. 
I listened to this young lady for three hours. 
That was not the guidelines. 
You're worried about guidelines, guidelines, the governor said the people should be able to come in and talk not listen to. 
You guys tell me what to do with my child.. 
Thank you very much.
, miss muchitash. 
can I just start sure 
um, my name is lauren mukhitash 
I've been in station for 13 years 
now I have elementary age children, I'm going to jump the agenda. 
I'm sorry,, I'm going to jump the agenda a little bit and go to item 12. 
there's been a proposal to create a divor diversity task force in sacrum, central school district. 
I'm here to voice my support for the creation of that task. 
Force sachem student body is comprised of 25 percent racial minority students. 
Our e and l students represent a staggering 98 different languages spoken within this district of 13 000 students. 
Our students represent a multitude of cultures, religions and abilities representation matters. 
Our multifaceted student body deserves to see themselves reflected in their teachers and administrators in the books they have access to and read 
and then the curriculum they are taught. 
So I would just plead with the board. 
don't render this to a toothless subcommittee with no power. 
There are lots of things that I love about sagem, and I think that this is a step in the direction to improve upon what we already have a strong foundation for. 
Thank you. 
I'm sorry. 
Next is. 
Mr warren hi, my name is jason moore
, I'm a parent in the community, sageman graduate. 
I would like to make a plea to the board: value and respect the school community by maintaining a high standard of transparency and communication at all times, but particularly in times of crisis. 
The communication from the central office and the board has been unacceptable. 
It is essential for every member of the school community students, teachers and families to be constantly updated at all times about every aspect of the reopening process. 
The meeting this meeting was not advertised to the school community at large. 
There were five parents outside barely and they left as soon as possible, communicate the following. 
communicate the following to community immediately. 
How will we ensure that our remote students are receiving an equitable education? 
I can't accept that they will receive a subpar education. 
You've put in your email that I received. 
While I was standing up front says it will not be the same. 
I need it to be equitable. 
I need my child to get an equitable education. 
They need to be live instruction and ongoing assessment. 
We need to figure it out. 
We need to put programmers in place. 
We need to figure it out. 
It has to be figured out. 
We cannot make an exception where part of our school community is receiving a subpar education. 
It's not acceptable, not acceptable to me should not be acceptable to you 
and it's not acceptable to your teaching staff. 
I know that for a fact. 
Secondly, a building space plan must be made available to the teacher to the parents of this community with individual room measurements and the capacity to maintain authentic social distancing at all times, and I need to know about the source of ventilation. 
I need to know what the school buildings look like. 
If you're telling me 17 kids in a classroom, I need to know that there's room for 42 square feet for every 17 one of those students I need. 
I need that in writing. 
Before I even think about sending my child back, I need clear opportunities for all parents to participate in this process. 
I shouldn't stumble upon this. 
I should be knowing about this weeks in advance. 
I need specific criteria for testing and tracing in all school buildings. 
I need a contingency plan for what happens when the rate of transmission rises above three percent. 
What do I do with my child? 
How do I make accommodations? 
I need to know these things before we put our kids on those buses. 
It's unacceptable that you're asking me to put a remote survey in place by friday, and your first parent meeting is on monday. 
That's unacceptable. 
The parents need to know. 
What's going on, the school community needs to know. 
What's going on, the teachers need to know, everybody needs to know it's unacceptable,. 
I need you to do a better job of communicating with the school community. 
Most important details need to be related to about our children's education in the future. 
address these issues immediately. 
The students, the teachers, the families in this community deserve at least this much. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much. 
Miss favaro campbell, I'm michelle for campbell. 
I wanted to just address the board about the diversity task force. 
As all of you know, I started that email and requested that it be put on the agenda and that you all consider creating one. 
It's been 10 years that I, my daughter, started she's going to be a senior now 
so 10 years ago I actually started talking to a lot of district office, which is very changed now. 
Maybe mr scavo might have been on the board of ed back then I don't remember, but most of you are not 
we're not then. 
It's been 10 years, since my family started talking about the having more diversity and representation within sachem 
and I'm really excited to see it finally make an agenda. 
I want to also make it really clear that it's about race, religion and abilities. 
I want children in wheelchairs to see themselves in books in their classrooms. 
I want children with autism to know that they are just as represented as every other kid in every princess book in every superhero story, and I want to help show our curriculum expand to teach children that kids with down syndrome can be teachers, because there are stories of preschool teachers who have down syndrome and kids, who are deaf and blind can grow up to graduate harvard law, school and become disability advocates and travel the entire world, and I right now we just don't show that we don't have the staff. 
We don't have diversity in our staff. 
We don't have diversity even in the books that they see when they walk into a classroom. 
So I just wanted to thank you all for putting it on the agenda tonight and for entertaining the idea and to understand that it's actually bigger than one issue, it's about every kid at sagem walking into their classroom, walking through hallways and right now, where I know reopening and dealing with covid, but this has been 10 years actually a little bit more in the making and sacrum is going to go on long before my daughter, who's going to be a senior and my son is going to be a freshman in high school they're going to be gone, 
and I don't want to leave that task force 
I want this to be 10 years from now. 
Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program has a very different experience than what they had, and so that's really important to me that you all knew that. 
So. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss sanders,, everyone, oh, everyone, maria sanders,! 
I am a parent. 
I would like to just make a statement in respect to the reopening committee. 
I 
I was a member of the reopening committee 
and I just would like to express my disappointment in the fact that the committee had no part in the actual planning or process of of the plan that was presented to the community. 
My understanding was that we would be part of that process, but instead we had two meetings where we were basically given the list of directives as administration and and the board of vet had planned. 
So basically, we got a sneak peek and the ability to ask a few questions, though I certainly respect the time and effort and energy that administrators put in, and I will not take anything away from that. 
You fail to utilize the very volunteers that you asked for because there was a tremendous amount of talent within that grouping 
and we certainly could have helped you in putting together this plan for myself having students in second in middle school and high school. 
I recognize that this plan is not going to be adequate for them and again, though, I understand right now
, we we're hoping that the testing standards are loosened. 
The value of a full-time education will not be, and these children cannot get a full-time education when they're in school. 
Fifty percent of the time they're only seeing a teacher, fifty percent of the time and they're they're sitting home in front of a computer for the other 50 that amounts to 10 days a month when normally they would be in school for five days a week. 
So I just asked that in the future, when you come to the community- 
and you ask us to step up and come in and help you really utilize us, because our voice really has not been heard. 
That's it! 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
miss williamson, nicole williamson,,, miss cologne, everyone, I'm josephine scalon. 
I have a soon to be second and third grader, and I just have a question because I'm still undecided about the virtual verse going to action school. 
If you go to school and you start in the school, do you have the option of then going virtual? 
Would that be an option? 
So I'm sorry go ahead. 
I'm sorry! 
So we're in this portion of the agenda. 
We're not allowed to do back and forth and answer questions. 
If you'd we can have your question written down and leave your contact and we will answer any question that you have. 
I can promise thanks. 
Thank you very much. 
Is it allison? 
Is it on the court? 
Is her email on the card? 
There's a phone number on the card. 
Do you want to put an email perfect? 
Thank you so much, the next one was also several questions. 
Would you prefer to contact this person as well? 
I mean I mean he's been waiting, so if he wants to ask him and then it's miss rep rapuno,, thank you,! 
That's all! 
For the first section we are on page two at the bottom number. 
Three business items consent agenda a through c, and I have a motion. 
motion by bill cogan second, by laura slattery. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried sorry bottom of page three personnel consent agenda. 
A through l. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
This is kate bleedin. 
So this is an unusual way to welcome many of our new staff, as we are having our first kind of live forum most of the time we have folks here to welcome them in person, and some of you are virtual. 
We would like to welcome all of our new staff that we vetted through really intense interview processes this summer with our administrative staffs in the building and staff members, faculty involved in the whole process and. 
That includes clerical custodial teachers, teachers, assistants and I 
think we have also gotten to the administrative section. 
Did I catch that correctly?
, so we're through the l- 
and I just want to welcome those folks that are in consent, agendas,. 
So far, thanks number five is support staff consent agenda a through j. 
Can I have a motion motion by meredith second, by jimmy and caruso. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried christie. 
Did you want me to stop again 
cause? 
I think you have michael there. 
joining us today is michael emanuel. 
He is over here to my left, the far, if you wanted to just stand and give yourself a wave, michael, is joining us today, as the network and systems administrator 
he's been a integral part of our technology, staff who have been working with jack renda in it. 
We're really excited about all the great things that we're going to continue to get the growth for our technology as we push through and put our smart schools investment through and and enhance the use of our technology for our students and our staff. 
So michael, we are on the top of page 12 number six personnel administrators consent agenda. 
A through g motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried okay
, we'd like to take a moment to recognize two other folks in the audience today. 
joining us is dennis mcelherne. 
If you want to give a wave- not quite sorry, I'm trying to stay on top of it here. 
They're. 
This close, this close sorry guys a little more suspense we're going to be towards the top of page 14 letter h, probationary appointment of the administrative personnel. 
There you go andy. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins? 
Second by mr wadawa discussion, discussion. 
I will be voting on this in the next two personnel items.. 
My reasons are the same as they've been for the past several board meetings concerning central administrative positions. 
That is, I believe, the new superintendent should be part of the process in any administrative appointments.. 
What I must make perfectly clear is that these candidates, as well as those from the prior meetings, are qualified and capable of the positions to which they are being offered, and I would fully support them if the new superintendent was part of the process. 
So this is a process, negative vote and nothing to do with the personnel. 
The new superintendent is close. 
I mean we're almost there 
and we certainly have qualified staff who could perform these functions for a short time as interims, so that for that reason, and that reason alone, I'm voting on the next three administrative positions. 
I must stress it has nothing to do with the individuals. 
I fully support them and would support them in the future. 
Mr kieran, just because you asked for a discussion and for the public and anybody at home by losing our superintendent, our assistant superintendent and our special ed director, we would have left three positions open where we would have needed interims and just for argument's sake, mr o'keefe. 
What is the going rate for an interim at that level per day? 
For which position are we speaking? 
Let's say it's: 
the superintendent rates vary, but a going rate for superintendent is probably 12 to 1300 a day, and then what about the assistant super? 
An assistant superintendent, depending upon which position it could be 800 to 1000 a day and an executive director of special ed would also probably be in a similar range, a minimum of 800 a day. 
So what and- 
and I don't necessarily disagree with your argument- 
but what what we did was we took a vote to have these positions filled. 
We had three people doing five people's jobs and it between losing that on a normal year is almost impossible, but losing it during covet is is impossible and we put things into motion to have these positions filled by qualified people to save that money, and this is money that 
I mean we we already just talked about taking custodians off- 
that we don't even know if buildings are going to get cleaned in time. 
Now we want to take more money out by filling these positions with indoors. 
I think that that's a slippery slope if we go down that path.
, I appreciate what you're saying my my. 
My position is that a superintendent of schools,, is the single most important person in the district and totally accountable to us and the district for making decisions and to have a superintendent of schools, not part of the process. 
Even though a new superintendent come in and doesn't know, the personnel is certainly going to ask the qualified people who who they are and do cement and be part of the interview process. 
I 
I think that's even more important than the saving of a few dollars here and there, 
but that's 
I mean I, I see I'm alone in that position, but I stand by it. 
I 
I understand where you're coming from I just if I don't appoint somebody until september 1
, that's a long period of time at thirteen hundred dollars a day, eight hundred dollars a day, and while it seems like a few dollars here and there over a three month period that we haven't had people that it starts to add up, and when we need money down the line, I would be afraid that we put it on in a room is when we had qualified people who could take these positions immediately? 
I will remind you of your fiscal prudence soon, [Laughter] alex just because we're having a discussion, so mr kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight, I I have personally known all of them. 
So it's without hesitation that I think that they are the best fit for sachem. 
I don't care who our superintendent is. 
I've trusted mr o'keefe, as our interim superintendent, to make the recommendations, and I 100 percent agree that any superintendent coming in will not find any better candidates than the ones we're putting forth tonight. 
Opposed motion is carried dennis, we're going to start with andrew larson, so andrew just want to welcome you to the high school north principalship, andy has been a teacher in our schools. 
He's been in personnel, he's been in an elementary hiawatha principleship, a sagamore principalship, an ap and two of our high schools, and now he's joining the ranks of the leader ship in north 
and we'd like to welcome you and wish you all the best we are on letter. 
I probationary appointment of the executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion. 
motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried [Applause] dennis mclehern. 
He's 
he's welcome back to sacham. 
He has been in our school district working as a school psychologist, an assistant to coordinator for special education. 
He left for a short stint to go over to north bab as a director over there 
and we're really lucky to have him back 
and part of our team as the executive assist executive director for special education. 
Welcome back [Applause] and letter j is an approval of an saa agreement for the executive executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion motion by ms slattery? 
Second, if I miss volpe, all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 14. 
contracts consent agenda. 
A through t. 
Can I have a motion ocean by mr coggins second by mrs wadwa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 20.. 
It's an action, itemist number, a mandated new york state board, training for matthew, bauman and robert scavo, all in favor, get kind of a motion motion by mrs volpe second by mr man. 
Caruso all in favor opposed motion is carried number b. 
It's an appointment of board committee members. 
Can I have a motion motion by miss lottery second by mr scavo. 
Any questions all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
Letter c. Is a board of education retreat? 
Can I have a motion motion by ms wado, a second by mr bauman, all in favor. 
Any questions sure I just want to make a quick comment:, especially since we're being fiscally prudent, a retreat is not like gurneys or something 
it's where we all sit in a room and talk. 
I just want to make sure that that's clear, because we are not going on vacation, though, because my first year I was prepared for gurney's 
and then we sat in the same set library. 
Thank you. 
We are on the top of page 22.. 
I'm sorry 
are we I apologize. 
Can I all in favor opposed motion is carried the top of page 22 donations consent agenda a through c. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggin second by miss ottawa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried number 10 at the bottom of page 22 committee on special education consent agenda, 
a through b motion by miss volpe. 
Second by mr mancaruso, all in favor opposed motion is carried number 11 monthly reports. 
So we there was a question from the community about when the committees would start meeting and how I think that, maybe, if people that were leading these committees, we want to maybe set some dates. 
We could do something virtually 
I'd like to see the budget committee start talking about if there was a possible mid-year cut and look into any and all options that there was. 
I don't know if there was anything else that you may want to look into, but that's just one that I thought of. 
I don't know about the legislative committee. 
If mr kiernan has anything for the legislative committee,, all right number, 12, we are back on public comment. 
This portion of the public comment will be on any and all items that anybody wants to speak at. 
That's not on the agenda, and everyone will have three minutes to discuss and, like we said before, 
this is not a q a and a back and forth, but we do want everyone to be able to be heard. 
That wants to be heard.
, the first one is miss young [Music].
, I press this.
, thank you for waiting for so long. 
Thank you. 
You guys have been outside the season board of education, members and community. 
It's come to my attention that vp sarah waterworld wore a bill.
,, we're a blm t-shirt at a board of education meeting. 
This is unacceptable. 
I can respect a person's right to free speech and to have their opinion. 
However, blm is a political movement and it does not belong at our border bed meetings or in our schools and indoctrinations. 
The definition of a racist is paramount in the name of black lives matter. 
The name indicates that black lives matter over the other races. 
This is unacceptable and this racism does not belong, including the blm is putting itself over our law enforcement, which many of our community are employed and of all races this once again making blm a black organization. 
Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has they have not registered as a charitable organization. 
We do not know whether the blm t-shirt, that was worn was for the black lives foundation or movement in either case. 
It has no right 
if any one of the board members wore my hat supporting trump, I'm sure the same thing would happen. 
The apology that was put on facebook was cynical and scolding. 
Call us as all races and insisting blm is not is not a political issue. 
Last I checked. 
Everyone in america had the same rights regardless of race, sex, color and sexual orientation. 
As specific cases of discrimination are happening in our community, then we must address those issues. 
What offended me is the use of rap music before sporting events, glorifying women's segregation, drug use and the cursing and the songs with the word and in it this is not acceptable. 
If we are going to talk about discrimination, it can it's got to be used both ways. 
So, let's start by banning that bml, not political, tell that to the murder black trump supporter bernal tramell. 
Furthermore, the disgusting political use of blm as an attack on our police and blue lives is not acceptable. 
Our community of all sects and races is made up of law enforcement. 
Blm is declaring war against all blue lives matter. 
Miss young there's a three-minute time limit. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much, miss o'connell, so conor. 
Thank you very much for waiting. 
I know that it's been a while.
, I am beyond angry at what is going on with our children.
, we are not doing the right thing by our children in any way, shape or form at this point in time whether we want to send our children to school or keep them home. 
Neither of those options currently are acceptable. 
I sent everybody board members in email. 
I got one reply challenged every one of your board members to go and spend 10 minutes in one of the one of the classrooms. 
On the first floor in the second floor of one of the high schools did any of you do that? 
I didn't think so. 
Yet you all think it's fine, obviously that we have no ventilation in the classrooms for crying out loud. 
We have to have special ventilation in the malls and other businesses, but where our most vulnerable are we don't? 
None of you would work in these classrooms in the current conditions, none of you. 
So why would you think it's okay for our children to be in there even before this, but definitely now now the air in those classrooms just stands there, because there's no movement, there's,, 
nothing and covert will stand in the air until it falls down on somebody so you're putting our children in an environment that is guaranteeing that if somebody has gold, but it's going to get on all the rest of them horrendous, it's despicable 
and now I'm hearing that remote learning is going to be a joke. 
That's not okay! 
Either!, I don't want my child in one of those rooms. 
I want my child safe, but my child is taking five ap classes next year, which means he needs a robust distance learning program. 
But my understanding is we're not doing that. 
Am I incorrect? 
No. 
So what we're doing to our children is despicable and you should all be ashamed of yourself just a second. 
Mr block, just a second, mr kyle I'll get your answer question right now. 
I had a conversation with him. 
You know, I know that you were asking the question about the being restricted in terms of the assembly, but it's pursuant to the governor's executive order, one of the number of executive orders 202.45, I looked. 
I believe I looked at that one, and that was talking about social media. 
This is okay, I'm just gonna back up just a little bit just so we can keep our space now. 
It talks about non-essential gatherings., and this is not essential. 
That's correct as long as while we're virtual, because you still have the option of being virtual, the board decided to assemble. 
so so you guys decided. 
This was not essential. 
So because you decided the governor, that's not that they don't decide.! 
So who decides well, there's based upon the governor's orders. 
The governor said that this is an honest. 
The governor said that we can conduct this meeting virtually or, you can but. 
So as long as you can conduct it, virtually meeting is considered to be non-essential because you have the ability to be able to connect the virtual reality.
, thanks thank you for that. 
It's, mr black, 
so 202.45 it was extended by 202.53 and it's in effect, until august 20th,, 
next fury good evening, I'm a proud sacrum educator and a parent of three daughters who attend sageman schools. 
I'm here tonight to voice my concerns regarding the secondary reentry plan. 
I have a daughter in eighth grade 
and I also have a senior. 
I have grave concerns regarding the lack of an equitable education for our secondary students. 
These children will suffer the ramifications of this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
In some instances, this decision may change the course of their adult lives. 
I don't want that to happen to my children 
and I don't want it to happen to anyone else's. 
I implore you to reconsider this plan and attempt to find a way to make the secondary re-entry plan more equitable, so that our chm students can receive 100 of the curriculum that they are entitled to just like our elementary students. 
Thank you. 
That's all 23 board discussions. 
The first one we put on today was an adoption of the 20 2021 calendar. 
There was a talk of a change. 
Mr o'keefe. 
It's just you know something I want to bring to the board's attention because obviously administration has been meeting with district administrators as well as our teachers looking at the opening of school and just trying to be sure that we can be as prepared as possible for whatever that is. 
Other districts have taken a look at this and also chosen that option each year a district is allowed up to four superintendents conference days. 
Our current calendar has three. 
The first two are in september the september second, and third days are superintendents conference days and the third one would be. 
On election day november. 
Third, we've been discussing the possibility of having the board consider the ninth, which is wednesday, I'm sorry, eighth, which would be the the first day of school for students to be a third superintendent's conference day in september. 
That would give staff teachers administrators everything all the time that they need to be sure if there are those last minute, tweaks changes to classroom setups changes to schedules assignments. 
Whatever the case is, you know, I had a lengthy conversation with mr barbara last night. 
You know his guidance. 
Counselors are ready to dive in to do whatever work needs to be done to make our secondary experience as good as possible, but we need the data first. 
So once we have that data we can dive in on this, we don't have much time and time is not on our side. 
So for your consideration, we'd like to talk about adding the eighth as a superintendent's conference day. 
Would we have to remove another day off the calendar for that we would just convert that date to a super. 
I wouldn't alter the calendar right now other than that. 
Obviously, since the year hasn't even begun, it still keeps us within legal limits. 
It still leaves us the flexibility if we were to have a severe winter. 
You know, maybe with the new reality of our ability to switch between distance learning. 
Maybe that can even help us. 
You know in bad storms and things like that, where we might be able to turn something like that on and not lose instructional time, but I think giving the staff that extra time, especially since we're down to the wire you know, could be helpful now on the counter side. 
Obviously, families are already starting to make plans they're ready to send kids back on the 8th they've already made decisions they've arranged child care. 
Whatever the case is so it isn't just as simple as you deciding let
's re-adopt a calendar, 
and maybe it's not even something you do tonight. 
Maybe it's something you consider you think about, and maybe it's on the next agenda for the 26th, but I wanted to bring it to your attention to give you some time to think about it and talk about it. 
you know. 
Is it a possibility where we could consider that day, for additional staff planning? 
Does anybody have a question about the calendar? 
I'm just thinking we're gonna make this decision. 
We have to make it tonight, so parents do have enough time to make arrangements. 
Mr bauman, can you what kind of professional development day would it look like? 
What would it look like?
, it would be a useful day for the teachers too. 
It's not a none. 
I mean miss heinz, can speak better to the professional development days. 
None of them are going to be like the normal professional development days. 
I'm sorry
, I didn't mean professional development superintendent's day. 
Would it be a day that the teachers would be able to kind of get their stuff together?
, we 
so 
I mean, as we've been saying, our teachers have been working hard all summer ongoing professional development. 
This is really more honored space for them, so they can continue to clean up. 
Get things ready, make sure the google classrooms all their lessons, are in place. 
So not our traditional. 
You know ad camp style superintendents conference days, but we recognize that it's a tremendous amount of work to get started. 
Does anybody have any other questions? 
Does anybody want to vote on it tonight or did you was the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready? 
It came through a conversation. 
You know, administration and staff have asked for it. 
So I agree with sarah the earlier the better I would agree as well. 
We can vote on it right now. 
All right motion to change the calendar to the eighth being a staff development day. 
Second, by miss volpe, all in favor opposed the calendar is done, get that information out to families as quickly as possible. 
The next item up for discussion is future board letter writing. 
This is something that I personally put on. 
I I don't think that we should be putting letters out to the community if, with all of our names on it, if we don't agree with what it says, and I could be in the minority on that- 
but I'm I would be fine with writing a letter, putting spaces underneath and letting those who agree. 
Do it now most times it's a nine, nothing 
and there's no issues 
but. 
You know I personally didn't agree with the letter that got put out and if my name is going to be on it especially admonishing another board member. 
I have to agree with it 
and that's just the way I personally feel about it. 
I understand that we're a body 
and I get that, but at the end of the day, it's our name and we have to put our head on our pillows 
and if we don't agree with something I want everyone to have the freedom to not only say that but be able to just to live with the decisions that are made and to be able to stand up to the community and say here. 
I did this or I did not do this and have a straight face when you say it, 
I 
I 
just I didn't agree 
and it's my fault for you know ever putting my name on that piece of paper. 
So I just I want to put it from here on out. 
If anyone has an issue, feel free, but if, whatever letter it is, we write the letter, our names are on the bottom and we can sign the letter if we agree with it. 
If we don't, we take the space away 
and then you don't have to sign it. 
If you don't want to, but at least you can, you can make your own decision and you don't have to feel like you're beholden, because maybe it's only five people who agree with it and five out of the nine agree 
and now, all of a sudden, it's a board decision and 
your name goes on it, no matter what jim so, how do you determine whose name is going on suppose four people want the letter out is: is that sufficient to send the letter with four names? 
That's! 
That's why it's up for discussion, so I did it. 
So it's got to be a majority. 
Take to even have the letter go out, so five members have to support it 
and then, let's suppose it's a 5-4, the letter does go out board of education and the five members who agree with it sign it. 
That's I'm going to see that if anybody had an issue with that, I I just wanted to address it tonight so that we haven't had a chance to get all together in a room. 
So so let me express you on the opposite end of the spectrum. 
If four people want to put a letter out 
and it's a four or five board, the four people be able to put a letter out, because the way that, when you sign up for the board of education, you sign up as a group, and you vote as a group- 
and, listen, there are things that happened in the past. 
Why? 
I was on the no side of a vote where I got dragged to the mud, but I signed up for that. 
You know, so my my impression is that five is a majority 
and and it's what moves resolutions and 
it's what moves you know. 
You know different different incent, you know initiatives and so on and so forth. 
So so I think the easy way to do that is that when you're getting attacked by a community member, because of what the letter says, your response is look the board. 
The board majority voted on it. 
I don't necessarily agree with it. 
You know, if you have concerns, contact the rest of the board. 
You know 
and that's how we leave it. 
Just just my just my personal opinion this 
I happen to disagree only because when we pass, let's just say the new principle for sage of north in the in the minutes, it will reflect that jim voted.
, it's not going to vote that.
, we voted, but if you go look in the in the back to it, jim can say I I 
I said and he could say anybody to the community and here's why I voted and he could put his head on his polo 
and he's fine like it will not reflect that. 
I said and, and just, I think it's wrong- 
that you get dragged through the mud on stuff that you voted for, and you can't even back it up, because there is no record of you ever saying.
, unless you look through certain things on votes, but if it's a letter, there's no record of anybody saying, but if the letter's coming from the board of education is it coming from the board of education? 
Is it coming from five board members? 
I mean I, so I guess my point is: I don't think we should be writing any letter. 
That's admonishing another member 
I mean most most letters are in agreement to the state saying we need our funding to the state saying we don't agree with certain things that they're doing, but we should certainly not be or so and- 
and maybe, mr black, you can answer this. 
When we get elected to the board of education, my voice means nothing more than anybody sitting out there. 
My voice only means one as part of us nine. 
We 
I have I can't decide anything. 
I have no more decision making than my neighbor next door. 
My my only input or influence comes as as a board of nine, so the letters that we had done previously, like supporting our seniors graduating in person or the denouncement of betty devos as the education or denouncing racism that was issued as a board, not as me as an individual. 
So I think legally, mr black, if you could just give us some guidance here that, when the board of education of sagem school district issues a letter, I think it has to come from the board. 
If laura slattery, who who lives in wisconsin, wants to send a letter to governor cuomo, then I signed my name: laura slattery, not laura slattery, ch, board of education, 
trustee and- 
and that's I feel that me on this board, I'm not a republican democrat independent anything. 
I am representing a community of 55 000 registered voters, my personal opinions or anything I feel personally does not matter when I'm sitting here with the nine nine of us. 
My only thing that I can do as a board trustee is in as a majority of this board. 
Unless, legally you see something, that's how I feel I was elected by the voters. 
I was elected by my sachim community. 
I 
I feel like I have to represent my sagem community as one of nine, not as laura slattery individual and, 
of course I don't think, that's being suggested, but we're a governing body and every governing body around the country 
operates that way. 
You operate as a body, you're elected to be part of this body. 
You make decisions as a as a body. 
There may be differences of opinion, that's part of our democracy. 
That's what makes our country great 
you'll, be able to express those opinions. 
At the end of the day, you have to make a collective decision, and then you have to abide by the decision that that body makes one possible solution. 
Is that? 
If you are going to issue a letter and there's concerns that dissenting members vote is not going to be known like it is? 
When we take a public vote, you can take a public vote to send the letter, and then you can adopt that letter as a majority vote. 
Those who dissent are on as a matter of record they're on 
they're on record, if that's the case, so 
so you're saying that no one member is allowed to remove their name from a letter. 
I would say that that's not typical practice that you would see, but is it legal for a member to remove a name?
, if the, when your letter is going out, I don't think it typically sets forth all the names. 
I don't know. 
I don't really like to say it. 
Has it printed all your names on the left side, it says, there's a list of all the names and on the bottom
, it's the president's name. 
So, on the left side of the letter it has all of our names listed. 
But that's your that's! 
Your letterhead lists all your names. 
It doesn't indicate whether or not you voted for that letter to go out or not. 
It's you're represented on that letterhead. 
It's an official board of education stationery! 
That's why your name is on there. 
It's not signaling that you voted for that or not, but the recognition is, though, that when you do take a vote or when the board puts out material that that's so so that's a fine, that's a compromised decision. 
I think that any and all letters should be discussed in public and voted in our public. 
That is a concern that you have 
that's one way of addressing it. 
I I was just going. 
I was just going to say that that sounds like an excellent idea and that really just goes back to you 
said about my vote. 
You know is on record and your eight votes are on record for these fine individuals here. 
So that would be the same thing. 
We discuss a letter. 
You know we take a vote on it.
, if it's a majority vote, the letter will go, but the dissenters are also in the minutes. 
I like it 
and I'm 100 in agreement with that. 
This way, it's a public discussion. 
Anybody can look back, but then we still are issuing a letter based on a majority of the board, but as long as there's a record of who votes and who votes?
, I'm correct. 
I am 100 fine with that. 
Just one statement and me and laura have gone round and round about this before, but I want to. 
I want to make this point. 
Look we're all elected members to this board as any elected official is. 
If I want to write a letter- 
and I want to sign my letter bill, cogan board trustee sachem, I'm 100 within my rights- to do that. 
It's a matter of opinion as to whether or not I should do that if I want to get together with four other board members and each one of us want to sign it as board trustees. 
Once again, we are within our rights to do that. 
All right. 
It may be perceived as a bad idea by this board, but there's nothing illegal about it.
, inside it's not a vote. 
I don't think we're going to take here. 
I just I just wanted to make sure that we discussed it 
and there was at least a public so that all future letter writing is done in public and just also just to add to it. 
It's been customary that at the bottom of the letter, the signature block states, the president's name on behalf of just signed the letter sincerely the sachin board of education and not place the president's name on the bottom of the letter.
,, the last item up for discussion is the diversity task force. 
So, as you guys know, I gave you guys all an outline about what just got a little bit closer.
, I gave you all the an outline, probably in the end of july, and I don't know if you all got a chance to look it over. 
I shared it with the board again the other day. 
Sarah. 
So I would just like to make a motion to put it on to vote tonight on establishing this task force. 
I mean my my only issue is, and I don't have a problem with this diversity task force, but the way community committees are usually done is that we could vote to establish one give direction to administration to come back as to what the charge is going to be talk about the charge and then approve it. 
I I 
I would say that that's that's, probably the route we should go and in the years that have been on the board, we establish construction capital projects, committees and you know some are established for one specific job 
and then they they they disappear, and that was for one of the. 
You know construction projects that we did after that we didn't do any for a while. 
So we didn't need that organization, but I would say that we we either vote on it tonight.
, we want to pursue something like this. 
We understand what the end game is, what we're trying to achieve and then normally what happened is administration would put together a packet of a pamphlet, that's made available to the community. 
They could download it in a pdf format. 
People would sign up for it submit in the same way they would for a budget advisory committee. 
You know 
or so 
or you know any other thing, so 
I would just say that we we follow that format. 
You know and- 
and you know, we're not adopting exactly what the world 
but we're establishing a diversity, task force and and charging administration to come back to us with what the charge is going to be. 
I would have no problem with that. 
Any questions everyone all in favor of I'm sorry, 
yep. 
I read the whole thing like lots of times. 
I think it's great, you know we need it here in saturn, all in favor, all right any opposed. 
Mr picariello, this still one visitor that we had called wasn't here at the time. 
miss williamson. 
Thank you, miss williamson, I'm sorry! 
I know that it's late, I apologize. 
I was doing yard work 
and I was listening. 
Thank you and I had to come 
so I apologize. 
This is my first time doing anything like this, so I really don't have anything written out or able to look up anything outside. 
So I'll tell you about myself. 
I have four children, three at hiawatha, two of them with severe nut allergies and one of them with viral induced asthma. 
I didn't, I don't really know.
, let me just go with this. 
My kids are fine, they will be homeschooled and they will be homeschooled.. 
What about all the other children that aren't as lucky as my kids? 
How come? 
Nobody is talking about them? 
How come what nobody's talking about the children getting hit at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't eating at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't learning or being sexually abused at home? 
Nobody cares about those kids. 
I hear a lot of things, how we're emptying the rooms 
and there's going to be nothing in there? 
No one's allowed to touch each other, no one's allowed near each other. 
We're not we're teaching our kids to be scared. 
I was scared for a long time. 
I've been hurt. 
I've been scared of allergies and a nut killing. 
My child fear cannot run us. 
We need to stand up for who we are and what we believe in 
and I believe all our children deserve a fair chance at life 
and we are not giving it to them. 
I think I think that's it. 
Thank you very much. 
I know that you waited a while. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Letter c is board of ed discussion. 
Future agenda items future discussion. 
Items excuse me: does anyone have anything future to talk about covered three tonight? 
We, the next meeting. 
I don't know if that's the right date. 
That's today.
, the 26th is august. 
26Th, we're hoping to still be here at 7, 30 p.m. 
Can I have a motion to move into executive session 
now we need a reason. 
Mr block, we're discussing we're discussing property,, property. 
I'm sorry! 
I just lost me. 
First real estate transaction, real estate transaction. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins 
say goodbye, mr bauman. 
All in favor meeting is good. 
Thank you very much. 
Everyone good night be careful. 
Going home,.
Thank you very much. 
is [Music], read the congratulations, so,,, visitors!
, everyone rise for the pledge and then remain standing for a moment of silence with liberty and justice for all. 
Thank you [Music] good evening. 
Everyone, as you can see, the board of education is attempting to return to some form of public meeting, which is also compliant within the limits set forth by the governor's executive orders and the guidelines of the cdc and department of health. 
We must limit the number of people permitted to be physically present as a part of our compliance with those obligations. 
Perhaps the most important item for our meeting tonight is a public discussion about the reopening plan for september, as it pertains to the plan. 
We hope to have answers to most of your questions as part of the presentation, but may also need time for the administration to research, an issue on occasion. 
You can always email the superintendent with the question as well. 
I am also aware that some attendees may wish to speak about matters related to conversations that occurred on social media and the role of the board of education. 
In that regard, if you wish to speak, be sure to fill out a card and give it to the district clerk. 
There will be two opportunities for public to speak at this meeting. 
The first is limited to comments relating to agenda items only. 
We will then move through the agenda after we complete the agenda items. 
A second opportunity for public comment about non-agenda items will be provided. 
I ask that all present be reminded to be respectful of one another. 
The administration and the board. 
Also the opportunity for public comment is just that public comment. 
The board of education will not engage in debate or back and forth with the public during the period of public comment in an attempt to provide all who wish to speak an opportunity to do so. 
Our policy limits comments to three minutes. 
There may be people who wish to speak, who have been left outside due to space limitations. 
ask security station at the doors for a card and they will bring it in to the clerk again. 
While we respect the community and we always want to provide people with the opportunity to be heard if things devolve into personal insult or invective as the president, I will entertain a motion to adjourn the meeting. 
I thank you all in advance for your cooperation to start tonight's meeting. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe are going to make a presentation about our reentry plan. 
Sure miss florio. 
Could you fire up the cameras for us 
all right just give us a moment. 
While we wait for that and while we're doing that, I'd also like to apologize to those from watching from home, because, unfortunately, obviously from that distance you're not really going to be able to see our screen. 
So for that we're very sorry. 
You know, unfortunately, the limitations of how many people are in the room you know have we been able to move it to an auditorium. 
We certainly would have done that, but we're limited to a total of 50 people or 50 of a room's capacity. 
Whichever number is lower, so, unfortunately we're at that 50 capacity in this room this evening. 
This document, we're going to show tonight again is another evolving document. 
Back on the 31st, we placed the district's plan on the website, as required by state law. 
That plan had to talk about three different models for return, which it did since the plan was posted on the website. 
You may have seen additional commentary from our governor where he has since changed some of the parameters, such as offering additional opportunities for choice for family and or for staff. 
So we need to take those things into consideration. 
So again, this document and the presentation you're going to see this evening is the most accurate as of now, but it by far is not completed at the conclusion of tonight's meeting in this presentation, you're going to get a copy of this presentation emailed to you through the school messenger system, it'll also be up on social media and it'll, be up on our website, you're, also going to receive an invitation to participate in a survey regarding choice. 
It's a follow-up to the survey that we sent out last week, where we asked potential preferences, this one's going to need to be more definitive where we actually need to know which families are looking to have their children receive instruction at home versus those that are willing to send children to school. 
So without further ado, I'm going to ask miss heinz to start us off. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe. 
So this morning we actually concluded and had our last committee meeting, which culminated in the plan that we're going to be sharing with you tonight and, as mr o'keefe said, all of the community members will be receiving at eight o'clock a phone call to this manner and also the plan and the survey for remote learning. 
I just want to thank all of the folks that were on that committee with us. 
We are made up of several community members unit leaders, staff of all sorts, and it really has been a pleasure to work with everybody. 
Excuse me one second, while I got this on, so after a tremendous amount of feedback that we received from our survey from our community and given the lengthy documents that we have given out and the models over the past few months, I can happily say that we are able to offer a full return for our elementary students k-5, as well as a full return for our students with disabilities, our special class, which would be our 15-1 classes, our 12-1 classes and our 8-1 students, and at the secondary level due to size and the fact that, because we will need to reappropriate space at both levels, elementary and secondary, we will have to move forward with a hybrid model for grades six to twelve, and that will be an a b schedule based on alpha and household. 
The reason why we were able to offer a full return for our elementary school is because mr o'keefe and myself and our instructional directors and our director for facilities and the building principal began walk-throughs. 
Last week. 
We walked through each and every room in our buildings to space and measure at six feet. 
On the average we are able to fit about 17 students in a class. 
Now again, know that we have scheduled a full return with our total population, so with any remote instruction that would diminish the amount of students coming into our schools, so we would actually have even more room because of the re appropriation of space we needed about one extra section or one extra grade level k5 at each building generally, so we are going to be utilizing space in our libraries in our arts and our music rooms and other common areas, which we'll talk about a little bit later on remote learning is something that, as you know, last week, it was confirmed that we will, as districts need to be offering this to our students as well. 
This will be a parent choice and a consent tonight at eight o'clock. 
Again, when you receive that plan, there will be a survey in there 
and we ask that only parents who are looking to remotely instruct their child fill out the survey, and it is due. 
It is a fast turnaround by friday. 
We need to be able to staff and schedule the remaining students that we have coming into our schools, remote learning again, 
that is by a parent's choice with consent and at this time it is a decision for the entirety of the 2021 school year. 
I say this now because, based on the number of possible staff who may also look for accommodations, that might mean staff members staying home in conjunction with our students, we need to match up to see if we have enough staff members who are going to be able to offer remote instruction or should we have to look towards live streaming. 
If we do not have enough certificated staff that matches up with the number of students, and so therefore we would not have possibly a physical space for students to come back to. 
If that were the case, should, of course, all restrictions be lifted through the governor's office, then we would have to, and hopefully would have a little bit of time in between. 
We would just have to restructure and reschedule to ensure that all students are able to return remote instruction will entail. 
It is not like being in person school and it is not distance. 
Learning. 
Distance learning is only going to be offered. 
If, again, we are ordered by the governor's office to remain at home. 
All students and all staff remain at home, and that would be live instruction for two and a half hours on google me that would be k12. 
Remote learning is different. 
This is, more asynchronous learning with possible, live or streaming teaching happening throughout the day. 
This would also be a schedule that would look a tad different based again on the number of students and how we would need to support everybody, but we just did want to be. 
You know fully upfront and present about that. 
We also know that devices for us 
we are not a one-to-one school district. 
We have definitely made some strides and we are in the middle of major infrastructure work that is going on. 
We just did order about a thousand new chromebooks in order to be able to disperse for families that do not have any technology in their home at all, but it would be difficult for us to provide a device for every student in their home 
should they be on remote learning. 
So that would be something that the family would also have to consider. 
Students will be expected to complete all assignments daily and any students, obviously with disabilities on remote learning, would be provided all of their accommodations as per iep. 
As for their iep okay, it's important
, I'm sorry, it's important to just also talk about the secondary hybrid model for six to twelve. 
On your a day, let's just say, you know, for the sake of just explaining it to everybody, it would be a combination on on a day. 
You would be in your child would run their traditional regular schedule. 
They would leave with homework and any work that would be on their google classroom for the next day that they are home, while the teacher is then teaching the other second half of the class on b. 
Obviously, our teachers are committed folks and they would be checking in answering any questions within that 24-hour period, but we would expect that at the secondary level, again, kids will be making sure that all of their assignments are completed and they are, and they are present. 
Attendance is important as we move forward in this school year.
, now that we shared with you a model of how we're looking to return our students, I think it's very important that all families and community members now our staff knows about the health and safety measures that we are putting in place, and we continue to look to put more in place as as time goes on, masks will be required for all staff and students, both in school and on the bus. 
Remember that the bus is an extension of school, any students are having any difficulty wearing a mask for medical reasons or because of a disability will need to submit documentation. 
As always, they would affirm this with their building principle or through the office of student services. 
Mass breaks will be provided because remember in our classrooms. 
Our desks are six feet apart and in the regulations. 
Children do not have to wear a mask during instruction. 
We would encourage, of course, that masks be worn at all times, but that does give us the opportunity to give multiple mass breaks whenever a child does need it, while they're being instructed masks are to be worn, though, however, in the hallways cafeterias, if they're not eating recess any other common area that we would just want to be safe,, we also every day. 
I'm, excuse me. 
bus travel will also include, as I said, before, social distancing practices optimally. 
We will be looking for six feet spacing and encouraging family members to sit together. 
Every day, parents and staff will be expected to fill out an online health screening survey and in this presentation, when you do receive it, you will see a hyperlink in there that you can see a sample of what it looks like ahead of time. 
We are also. 
We also took time to ensure that at arrival and dismissal, varied entrances in all of our buildings will be sanctioned off to separate grade levels. 
If they come off of the bus, we are also looking to take off the grade levels at increments of time off the bus. 
So everybody is not coming out at the same time so again, just looking to work ways to have plenty of flow while classmans may not look typical, especially at the younger levels. 
You may not see some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see. 
know that our classrooms will be warm and inviting like they always are, because their teachers will be there. 
Their principals will be there and we will still be able to decorate it. 
We will just not be able to decorate it with things that kids will be touching, because it would need to be sanitized every day. 
All classrooms will be devoid, as I said before, of any of those items that may collect germs. 
We are in the process right now, of setting up opportunities for our teachers to continue to clean out their their own personal items, and we are also moving out any unwanted furniture that we don't need in the room so that we can maximize 
the space hallways and other common spaces are being marked appropriately to ensure social, distancing, so markings on the floor items around on the walls and that's also shared later on in our presentation. 
So you will be able to see it at home as well. 
When you open up the link hand, sanitizer stations are located throughout each building, all along the hallways. 
We will also be having them at the elementary level or any other area for gym cafeteria time when, at the secondary level, they're able to go out so 
as children go in and out, they can use a hand sanitizer as they come into school. 
All of those. 
You know, welcoming areas would have a hand sanitizer station as well and at the elementary level. 
We would expect that the students, because we do have sinks in every room they would be washing their hands before and after snack and before and after lunch., so continued on. 
As I said earlier, we have reappropriated spaces at the elementary level and we are in the process of doing the same walkthroughs. 
Now in the secondary buildings. 
We know it's going to be very difficult, especially for the cafeterias to be utilized the way that they typically are, because children cannot sit in those tables together. 
So moving in some desks, looking at classroom use all of those different types of things, but really at the elementary level. 
We will be using again if we're going on full return for all students. 
Right now in elementary school, we would be looking to utilize our music space, our art space, and so therefore, those special areas become pushing for our students. 
We have worked with those departments and we'll continue to work to make sure that they have everything that they need for their lessons and equipment. 
Cleaning of all buildings will occur daily in the evenings in each classroom. 
We will also provide hand, sanitizer, wipes, gloves and any sort of spray bottles and wipe offs for for our staff and or students who feel encouraged to clean in between applicable filters have also been changed in our classroom events. 
We will also look to open up our windows and our doors where we can. 
Obviously you know the reverse was safety making sure that your doors were always locked. 
Your windows were always closed. 
Now, we're being encouraged by the department of health to please use fresh air when possible. 
So we will look to do that prior to it becoming too chilly up. 
Isolation areas have been identified in our buildings, and so, if a child is it has any sort of of symptoms or they come to school 
and they have not filled out the health screening. 
Those students would be placed there so that we can offer a temperature check and make sure that everything looks okay before we send them down to their classroom hygiene protocol visuals will exist in all buildings if they're not there. 
Already and again I share those with you at the end of our presentation so that you can see them. 
We will also be having routine hygiene drills much in the same of how we have regular school building drills at this time. 
Unfortunately, no visitors will be permitted in our schools. 
We just cannot provide enough secure measures for our staff and our students, and so again we will be limiting all visitors. 
Both traditional fire and hygiene. 
Drills will be conducted elementary snack and lunch will be in the classroom to minimize flow and secondary lunch. 
It may be in the cafeteria and alternately in the classrooms. 
We will also rotate any outdoor areas so for recess any of those other matters classes will be rotated on the game field, the basketball court, let's say, for example, and in our playgrounds students, are encouraged to bring their own water bottles. 
We do have bottle filling stations in all of our buildings. 
Our water fountains, unfortunately, will have to be closed at this time.
, so just some additional elementary return details that we wanted to share with you. 
You know it's always tough to start with health and safety, because again we don't want it to sound, like our students are returning to jail, but we do want to make sure that our students and our staff feel safe for the return. 
But know that, on top of everything that we are doing, the social emotional well-being of our students is of the utmost importance to us, as well as of our staff, and we have surveyed students and we are looking to survey further the rest of our staff to just find out what are some of those underlying issues or concerns that people have. 
So we can ensure that we have our mental health staff there for supports. 
Unfortunately, we we will have to stress that students may not share materials. 
At this time, students will be assigned their own independent, math, workbooks and guided reading baggies will be provided weekly so that we have time to interchange them out clean them up and leave them for the weekend, so that there's a two to three day lag before the children pick up a new baggie and in those items we will integrate. 
As always in our literacy and our math, our science and social studies, topics whenever possible, this will be in addition to the strong direct instruction that our classroom teachers provide. 
Already all all students will be benchmarked for their ela and their math to identify their present learning levels. 
Curriculum will be retard as needed. 
We definitely know that this will need to occur for math, and we have provided some slides in the past that show you that we're fortunate we created our own math curriculum here 
a couple of years back 
and we know the the one to two units that each grade level will probably need to go back to so that, if I'm coming into second grade, I'm certainly not going to be able to start on my second grade. 
Math curriculum 
I'll need to be re-taught, some of the materials from when I was in first grade and for literacy. 
Once the teacher knows the collective levels of what they have in their room, they will be able to accommodate those literacy. 
Lessons around that art and music will be a push in again to minimize the flow, and we are currently working with our art, music departments. 
This is one that was a really tough hit. 
Music has to be 12 feet. 
Apart for any coral or any sort of wind instruments, we are working our hardest with that department. 
We are very fortunate here. 
We have a very strong music program and we do not want to see that diminish, 
and so we are looking for ways to think out of the box in order to be able to offer course opportunities that might be in smaller sections and different ways to offer lessons as well, but we have provided and are keeping all lesson areas in the elementary schools, so that students can still maintain lessons as needed. 
Physical education will be a mix of separating two classes. 
Typically, that are adjoined, so one class will be in the gym. 
One class will be outside and inclement weather they will rotate between the gym and in the classroom.
, mr butel and miss mcentee have reworked their curriculum to ensure that all team sports will be done in the spring, so all of those units will be taught in the spring and in the beginning it will be more personal. 
Fitness. 
Traditional grading will also return for our students. 
While we know that there may be some interruption in terms of what model our students may have to face, where we hear rumors that we may have to go to distance learning sometime later in the fall. 
We fully believe that by using google classroom no matter what we will be able to make that seamless transition to distance learning should we need- 
and we are well prepared, as opposed to when the crisis first happened, and most school districts were really just grasping at straws, 
but we also know that the accountability is something that is very important to our students very important to our community and especially to our students who are at the high school level. 
As I said before, google classroom will be utilized for communication at both the building principle and classroom teacher level. 
We really want to make sure that parents are on one medium so that they can see any communication, email messages, lessons etc, and at this time we are going to enforce, to ensure for the safety of our staff and other students that any sort of instruction that is done on google classroom or virtually that our students adhere to our district code of conduct. 
When students this year sign on families sign on to look at schedules, they will be asked and prompted to sign off on certain measures around this. 
I just wanted to share with you some of our pictures that john 
and I took as we went around in our walkthroughs. 
These are some samples of our our elementary classrooms. 
Again, they're, not decorated, yet, of course, but you can see that we have removed a lot of the traditional. 
You know, wonderful items that we would see in a classroom, but again we really wanted to maximize space and ensure that the teacher had space in the front of where their smart boards are and then also making sure that kids had room and were not. 
You know pushed up too too much, so we still are adjusting that once every single classroom is created at the building level, we will be returning mr o'keefe and I, with our team, to just ensure that everybody has space both the teacher in the front of the room and then students around. 
So again, we are fortunate here. 
We do believe that we have enough staff to move forward and should the numbers for remote learning ensure even more flexibility. 
We may be able to open up more sections in our elementary schools and at our secondary levels, bringing back more secondary students. 
This is at one more of the elementary school and to the right there. 
You will see a classroom at the secondary level.. 
This particular sample is where we marked it the a and b desks, so that students will be sitting 
and then it will make it a little bit easier for cleaning at night for our custodial staff.. 
This is this is also a little bit of a tough share here, because I know that we've been getting a lot of questions about child care and upk. 
First, child care: we are still going to be providing am npm child care by boce by scope, educational services. 
They continue to offer right now child care throughout the pandemic for our essential workers, and they are happy to move forward to offer this services for all of our students. 
At this point, though, we are on hold for our upk program, and that is not because we don't have the space or 
we don't want to, but we simply have not received the allocations yet from the state, and that is how we are able to run our our upk program. 
While we do have many students who do a tuition based into the program, it is simply not enough to substantiate the program. 
Should we not get the allocations, so we are advising parents at this time. 
I know I've. 
I've answered many phone calls many emails if you are need, if you need care, if you would like your child to go to an alternate preschool now is the time to seek that out just to be safe. 
However, if we were to find out about the allocations tomorrow, we would also be able to implement that. 
You know moving forward, so we have not changed anything we're not changing any spaces at this time, we're just kind of on a standstill but to be safe. 
We just encourage you to look just in case. 
Excuse me, ms hines, yes. 
Actually, since we last spoke earlier today, I spoke to mr duffy, he's the executive director of scope and runs our upk program just trying to see if he's heard anything further about the program and he has not heard much more than we have. 
As a matter of fact, there was a meeting earlier in the day with the suffolk county, superintendents, as well as mr wix who's, the regional superintendent for eastern suffolk boces, to see what boces knew about upk funding and again their contacts in albany have been very, very quiet on it. 
The only information they've received is, you know, floating a balloon from albany that they're considering opening upk up, but they may only fund it at 80 percent of what the grant would be. 
So that would mean if the district wanted to move forward. 
That would be an expense that was not budgeted for and we'd have to make a determination. 
You know to take those monies from elsewhere to support the program, so it sounds like they're getting closer to a final decision, but I'd have to keep the border prize, so it might be a model in which we'd have to support 20 of the program to make it move forward. 
So I'll keep you posted on that. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe,, and then on to now our boces cte program. 
So those are our students because we do have two. 
We have cte programs that we house ourselves. 
They will still remain on the a b schedule, but the but the bose cte programs, where students get on the bus and go to boces. 
Boces did alert us last week that they will be providing that in house they do have the room 
so that will be live every day and for those students 
we will still have busing from our high schools to and from the program. 
We at this time, though, say that we may need family support in terms of if your child might need a ride to school if they are going to the program in the afternoon or alternately. 
That is, that is not solidified. 
Mr o'keefe and mr savone are looking at that through transportation to see if we might be able to accommodate and pick up individual students at their homes. 
That would only be for those choosing remote learning right. 
Only those choosing remotely. 
Thank you,,. 
So here I just. 
I share the hyperlinks that you will see on on the presentation that that we've sent home for the sake of time, I'm not going to go through all of these links, but the top is a sample of our health screening form and the bottom of our all the protocol visuals a sample of them that we have smattered around every single building and so for our next steps. 
As we said this morning, we finished our planning committee meeting where we laid out the the final steps here with our district leaders and our volunteers. 
Our board of education, pres presentation is, is now as you can see, and then we also have a live community forum on monday at seven o'clock and we will be live streaming it. 
Similarly here, however, I would envision that we would be a little closer that so that you can see us a little bit more clear, but on friday we will be sending out a survey just asking community members for questions that they have. 
We will collate those into subject areas and we will look to our best answer. 
Any questions that you have as well as our building administration will be delivering a common q, a sort of like fact sheet about further details pertaining to to the buildings, and this will include sample schedules for all of our students- orientations how those will go out for our grade six on our grade nine. 
Some of that will be virtual and some of that will still be activities just broken up into smaller increments at the building, as well as arrival and dismissal times and bell schedules for secondary students and then, lastly, as governor cuomo had ordered on friday, we are in the process of updating our district website for protocols for any symptomatic individuals testing. 
We are not responsible per se for testing ourselves, but we are responsible for offering a plan. 
Should a student or a staff member go home, they are required to go, get testing where that could occur, and then, of course, they can't come back into school until testing results have been provided and then contact tracing as well.. 
So that is the end of our presentation this evening. 
We look forward to speaking and sharing some more and clarifying more for you, as the rest of the night goes on and then on monday, as well at seven o'clock. 
Did I my apologies. 
Let me go back. 
I 
I didn't realize that I think I got caught up in what we were saying about upk before, so my apologies. 
These are some additional details about our secondary return and again, with the utmost priority being the social and emotional well-being of our students. 
In grades. 
Six to eight we will be benchmarking for eli. 
We do that through a literacy management system that we have and also for math. 
All of our math departments have benchmarking type assessments that they do in the beginning of the year and again this will be to identify present learning levels in grades, seven to 12 curriculum adjustments may be made for applicable areas where prior learning needs to be had so, for example, in our math and our science classes, there may need to be some learning from the prior year's regents bearing class, and so we would be looking to look at curriculum around that and possibly offer review classes for our students as well again, traditional grading will return. 
Students may not share, so we will be limiting textbook use 
and we'll be taking advantage of all of the online subscriptions that we have physical education again. 
Very much like elementary school will be a mix of the gym outside fields and other large area 
use instrumental lessons very similar to elementary. 
We are working with that department to ensure that lessons will occur. 
They do need to be 12 feet if they are wind and or choral in nature, and again we will be looking to figure out ways in order to still offer those choral groups, but in a modified version google classroom will continue to be utilized for communication with both the principal and the classroom teacher again for a seamless transition should we ever be ordered into distance learning. 
Lockers will mostly be used for am and pickup 
only that's not to say that if a student really needed to go back, we would not allow them to, but again just trying to minimize the flow and minimize how much our students are putting into the lockers. 
So we would envision some form of outerwear
, that's appropriate for that time and modified or or very. 
You know slight binders and or folders notebooks that they need stagger grades again in times of at the end of the period. 
We would be announcing grades so that they can come out into the hallways, so that would mean that we would be at the end of the period starting it a little bit earlier, so that we can allow each grade level to disperse into the hallway to their next period.
, sorry about that. 
So that still is the end of our presentation. 
We hope that this did clarify some further information for you. 
We are appreciative of the support and the time that the community offered us to be able to digest everything and wait for the orders, so we can bring this to you tonight. 
Thank you. 
Questions from the board questions from the board. 
Is anybody, jim, a john on the upk right now? 
The way that's funded is. 
Correct me. 
If I'm wrong, like a six hundred thousand dollar grant, primarily we get a six hundred thousand dollar grant. 
We hold a lottery that allots 252 families a spot in the program we have more interest than that annually, but families beyond the 253 are able to participate for the same rate, which is about twenty four hundred dollars per family for the year. 
So if, if the governor would give us 80 percent of that, that would mean that the district would have to come up with a hundred and twenty thousand dollars correct. 
But are you in that hundred twenty thousand dollars? 
Are we counting that that the lottery people are not paying tuition? 
That would still be the lottery people not paying right, so, in other words, the 120 000 could be reduced if the lottery people were willing to pay a tuition fee.
, that was a model the board chose to go with.
,, thank you just to figure back on what security was saying if they were to to to. 
Take twenty percent of that we'd be looking at about 479 thousand. 
Two hundred is what we'll be looking at, which is what accommodate 201 kids. 
You were saying that you were concerned that we, we might not be able to raise the funds to be able to. 
You know, manage the program and have enough you know what I mean. 
You'd have to redo the lottery. 
Then I I wouldn't I don't know. 
If would necessity, would you want to use the same number then cut it off?
, I set off at just 201 
and then and then open it up at 237.69 per per family per month. 
We could examine any model that the board wanted to take a look at. 
Certainly those other families had already been notified that they were among the families chosen for the free program. 
That's the worst. 
The worst case scenario would be correct, but let's say they take all the funding and, and they don't and one of the concerns to have it 
I mean have we thought about reaching out to some of our state elected officials, flanagan or doug smith, to find out if they can get us clarification from the governor's office as to whether or not he's going to fight, we can certainly continue to reach out. 
Quite honestly, during much of this crisis, much of them have been rather silent. 
We haven't been able to get a lot of information. 
The governor isn't sharing much with other people other than when he decides to put it out via press conference, I mean. 
Normally, our local representatives are very helpful in getting information for us. 
Unfortunately, hadn't been able to get information for us, but it's certainly worth trying. 
I mean we're two weeks before the start of school 
and you've got 252 families, not knowing whether or not they have a pre-k. 
I mean I don't know, you know how the board feels, but 
I personally think that you would get 252 families, even if they took all 599 000, because at 237 a month for half day pre-k, it's still a great great opportunity sure- 
and I can't and now more than ever and and would be willing to work with us if there was zero funding 
and we had enough participation to still run the program. 
would can we include something like that in the survey sits some of the families out there to see what the interests would be. 
We could do a separate survey. 
I wouldn't want to you know not on the same survey. 
put it out as a separate survey, specifically targeted to those families that are already in the process. 
I have a follow-up to that. 
Where are we putting all these students if our classes are maxed out at this time we still have not reappropriated those classes. 
We do have a couple of buildings because of additional special education sections that we needed, that we moved the classes, but we have not taken away those class spaces. 
Yet so, if we were to go with the will of the board to you know, put out a survey and go with a tuition base, we would be you know all set to go: hi. 
I just had a quick question about the bus and what is the busing going to look like I mean again
, it'll also depend on participation. 
You know we put out a survey to the parents a week or so ago. 
I think we had nine thousand respondents in in very brief order. 
in that survey about a third of the families considered, possibly keeping their children home of the two-thirds willing to send their children in 65 of those said they would use the bus. 
The other 35 said they would drive their children to school. 
So just some quick, math you're only looking at say, 4 500, kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers. 
I mean they could change when we put out the new survey, and it could be that you know parents first stop that they don't want to use the bus and then during the year. 
Maybe they start. 
You know they need the bus. 
So we're not reducing the number of bus runs. 
All the runs that have been budgeted for would be running, but with those numbers you'd end up literally with just about one child per seat. 
You know so 
and then you also take into account 
remote you'll get routed for 44 students. 
So in the worst case scenario there could be two pupils in each seat, but based on the information we're receiving, I don't think there'll be that participation.
, just some clarification so with the custodial staff cleaning each night, so 
they're going to have more to do than they did prior. 
Have we increased the custodial staff since their job description will be different to do a more deeper cleaning every day daily versus. 
Unfortunately, that was one of the items that was pulled back on the budget, so obviously we may need to take a look at that again we were rating 10 custodians and then, when there was issues where we even today, we still don't know what our state funding is 
and we still have the potential of a looming. 
20 percent cut, we decided. 
If you remember back to january and february, we were talking about this. 
We were adding one extra custodian, each building right. 
That was one of our enhancements for this year's budget. 
We did draw that back, so we're going to work with the staff. 
We have work with the substitute staff we have, and you know it as best as possible to optimize cleaning, and then with the secondary schools, where you have the a b desks next to each other. 
So that means, if I am an a student and I sit in only the a 
and then the next day, the b desk comes in. 
That image might change, though I was going to say that that was really more so that we can show a visual to the families, how we were spacing it out in the beginning, 
those desks we would see needing to be reappropriated and put into our our lunchrooms different other areas where we're going to need to reappropriate other space, the library different items like that. 
So I don't. 
I don't necessarily think we were just at north today and in the classrooms that we walked around in with miss trombetta. 
There was only about 15 to 16 desks in in each classroom: 
okay. 
That was an initial setup when we were trying to figure out what it would look like or how we could divide them up. 
But in fact, with the style of cafeteria tables, we have it. 
It really prohibits the number of children that can eat in the cafeteria. 
We believe we're going to take all the cafeteria tables out of those secondary cafeterias and store them and put in desks. 
I mean it's not going to be the most attractive. 
Lunchroom it'll be set up more like a testing room where children will be spaced six feet apart right with classroom desks correct, but we do anticipate that we would be able to offer breaks, for you know, students to be able to go outside and go into any of the recreation areas, 
items like that elimination and so then in the secondary schools. 
If the kids are changing classrooms will the desk get wiped down between each change or how does that work in the cafeteria?,,, not in the classrooms that would that would technically be not possible. 
I mean there's 3 000 desks in high school and 1600 or so in in a middle school. 
That just wouldn't be the means in that four or five minutes of passing to wipe down those tables. 
But if we student would want to do their own destiny, the materials will be in the classroom right. 
We are providing that for every classroom. 
and then one last question., everybody! 
It's okay! 
If a staff or a student happens to test positive, that would then be reported, and then the cdc would guide us on what we had to do or we have our own plan. 
How does that work? 
The department of health, the department of health department of health? 
So they would tell us so if it's one student in one classroom 
right that may be different than a student in a middle school who passes through a hall or mrs clayton's, become an expert on the matter.
, so the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require us to make reports for certain things and they require the medical treatment provider. 
The doctor who's performed the diagnosis for a positive result to report information to reporting for contact tracing. 
So therefore, our obligation we go above and beyond to make sure that, even if, for some reason, the medical treatment provider has not contacted the contact tracing, we will just check you know belt and suspenders that we have provided some insight in case 
there's an instance. 
The other thing is when the lab results come back. 
The lab results are supposed to be also provided to the contact tracing, at which point the department of health would be or enter cdc would be contacting tracers and determining who they would contact, including students or staff or family or whoever they came into contact with. 
Can I can I pick you back on that question quick?, thank you very much so on the checklist that we do daily. 
Let's just say rob 
and I are in a classroom 
and I find out that he test positive for covid the next day when my parents are filling out the check sheet and it says, have you come in contact with anybody? 
That's tested positive? 
Will that prevent my entrance into the building? 
If you're saying you tested positive, if you're saying you're tested right?
, I mean, I'm, not gonna, tell you that rob testifies we're not allowed to tell you 
I mean I came to learn it. 
It becomes common knowledge of who it was, and now I have to honestly fill out the sheet 
I mean I'm have to now have to say.
, I did come into contact with some of the department of health guidelines for close contact, and this is where it gets a little squirrelly because you know, are we in close contact? 
Are we in close contact? 
Their criteria for close contact is less than six feet for 15 minutes or more, so we'll have to look at each of those one at a time, and I can foresee the department of health as soon as schools open, you know, becoming overwhelmed with calls from districts all around the state just trying to get feedback and answers, so we're building criteria and protocols with our nursing staff with our personnel staff. 
You know, so we can make some of these decisions on our own. 
We have handled situations already, even during summer school programs. 
So it's not that we're unfamiliar with how to do it. 
We've had staff members with with covid, so it's just going to be on a bigger scale. 
Now, that's all, and also just to mention, mr block is with us this evening from ingram and smith. 
He has been our one of our main contacts that we've been triaging information between the state, the federal, what we have in our schools, what we can do and what we can't do and trying to find the best scenario for our students and our staff 
and we'll continue to do so, and I promise this is my last question. 
So if a parent chooses the remote learning,, they have to commit to that for the year. 
They can't change their mind like after the first marking period, they're committing to that 
and then their student cannot participate in, let's say spring sports,, so, I think in in the beginning of the guidance, it said that students may not be able to may not be able to enter into activities or sports. 
We know now that that is not the case and that if a child is remote, they're still a student of ours, we're not really going to have any activities. 
So we don't foresee that being an issue. 
So it's really more for sports, but miss trombetta who sits on. 
The community. 
Four section has shared with us information in terms of how they're looking at that language and how we would not be prohibited most likely from keeping children back from sports in september, and then the child plays a spring sport and then come the spring. 
Sports are up and running and you tell the child they can't play, and just know that when we write that we're looking to make it more of a commitment that could be up to a year. 
That is because we don't want to give the misnomer that if a child says well, I want you know a family to say that they want to be remote in a week 
and then they change their mind. 
They want to do it another week. 
We will look at each case, but it would be very challenging for us to bring back large numbers of students who think who feel they might have made a poor choice, because that would shift all of our classrooms and all of our teaching staff.
, I would totally agree with that. 
I just didn't know if it would be like after every marking period reevaluated, but if the parent does commit, I just don't want to hurt the student of course by saying. 
If extracurricular comes back in spring, your parent made this choice in september, and now you can't participate right 
and I think for us, you know being just of mine- that things could shift very easily. 
We could look to look at that come january 
and it may not need to be a year-long commitment, but we did want to write it down so that parents were aware all right. 
Thank you very much. 
Thank you for sharing this with us. 
I have two questions or concerns. 
When this plan was developed to return to school k through five the ada b day, it wasn't based on surveys that went out as to the number of parents that think they would choose remote or not choose remote. 
It was based on our entire population.
, so conceivably, if we have a, a 6 through 12 model of a day b day, hypothetically every parent said, I want my kids to return to school. 
We can. 
We can accommodate all of them in an ajb day. 
You mean physically back into school.
, we wouldn't be able to do that. 
How would we physically bring them all back? 
We don't have so at the elementary level, just very simple, math. 
We have to take out about five to six, seven kids out of each classroom in order to be able to accommodate that average size. 
My question a little bit on the six through twelve model--,, it that was based upon returning every single child to school. 
So if friday, the survey is if we have if we have more children now I understand you. 
Thank you. 
So if we have more children who are going to be on remote, we could conceivably- 
and I know we discussed this this morning in our committee- 
we could look to bring back more students. 
My question is that my concern is the same as laura is having a one-year commitment. 
I received a half a dozen phone calls today,, probably in the last couple hours about I'm concerned about the one-year commitment we know.
, that you know in remote learning it says remote instruction is not equivalent to in-person hybrid instruction right
, so it's not the same level right so for forcing kids out of school. 
What we're doing is we're creating a bigger educational gap for the following year.
, we're not forcing that would be a parent's choice, but the thing is we allow them to come back after each quarter.
, if we're able to accommodate them according to the way the plan was designed. 
Why wouldn't we allow them come back after after one quarter, so they can get that? 
I didn't think we said that we wouldn't be allowing we said that it would be really prohibitive for us to be able to reschedule them back into classrooms, but we could look at it based on the numbers that we have. 
We wanted to be honest, mr scavo, and let families know that this could be a year-long commitment, and most districts are looking at that at either january or the year long, because it is very disruptive that would mean having to up just move around the entire schedule for. 
You know our schools, which we may still have to do, should covert restrictions be lifted, but you wouldn't want to recant, and we know that that happened quite a bit where, in the beginning of all this debacle, we were putting out information 
and then something you know, alternatively, was shared, but I think we just said before with miss slattery, that, of course, if we could look at it by quarter and we felt like it wasn't going to be a tremendous feat for our families that we would do that. 
But I think that that's not probably what a parent is going to make their choice on if I'm choosing to be remote. 
It's because I'm thinking that it's unsafe for my child to be at school. 
So I'm hoping that by these presentation, slides that we have 
people will see that we've made tremendous tremendous. 
You know strides in making sure that our schools are safe, they're, clean and we're doing routine protocols to ensure that, but the commitment is a year. 
That's what this time for right! 
Now!
, so if something changes at home a person, that's furloughed now has to go back to work right, they want to and their their impression is going to be that they can't return because they signed the paper saying that they have a one-year commitment to be at. 
But I mean I think, though if, if there's something along those lines- 
and we all get those calls all the time, if there's a family, that really is in enough need and feels like they made the poor choice or not a poor choice. 
They made the wrong choice for what their their thing is. 
Going on right now, so whether a parent goes back, furloughed or their child is just not doing well in remote learning and they were to contact us just like any other parent phone call that we would have. 
Of course, we would look at every case individually, but I'm talking as a whole. 
We could not say you're going to be a remote 
and then, if you choose to decide in masses that you want to come back, we just would not be able to run the same schedule 
and then we would be restarting everything over again. 
The reason why I bring this up is: I watched the the newsday webinar yesterday we had dr johnson. 
I finally heard all about him. 
I got a chance to see him in the presentation, along with a psychiatrist along with a the superintendent of north babylon, and that exact question came up right and a lot of the experts were saying. 
I would not go past a semester. 
In fact, a lot of districts are going quarterly, you know- 
and I just don't. 
I just don't want to influence a person's decision because they're fearful that, if they sign that paper they're not going to be able to come back because the reality of it is
, is that you know when we look at the education of even a day b day. 
My concern is that, as a teacher, you can't teach the entire curriculum and now we're talking about prior learning being re-taught from the previous year, how you and you're never going to be able to teach the the entire curriculum, but the kids that at home that are not getting the same. 
Equivalency of education are going to be further behind the following year and which all we're going to do is create a a snowball effect and that's my concern. 
I mean you know I personally would like you know the opportunity that, if they, if they come back after, if they're the first quarter, which is a 10-week period or nine-week period, I think it would be a little more settling for the people in the community. 
Knowing that all right, this remote's not learning I committed to a year now, I'm stuck well
, I mean, I think I think two things right, because I agree with you. 
I don't think anybody wants to be in the position where we can't welcome back students interchangeably as they need, and we definitely know that, no matter what happens. 
Curriculum is going to be interrupted this year. 
That is a safe bet, but if we play, if it's the will of the board, if it's the will of the board to change that- 
and you would like to make that language more flexible, we're happy to do that. 
But know that we've taken, you know quite a concealed amount of time to making sure we would prefer our students not to be on remote, but if a family really chooses and needs to choose that we honor and we respect that absolutely. 
But, I mean nobody wants to do that, but nobody's the size of sagem either, and so we have different restrictions. 
That's why the question was the plan design based on the entire it was. 
It was based on of if all students were going to be a full return, then we would have to go in an a b day if we are finding, though, that we have remote students at a quantity where we can bring back students even an additional day or or by grade level seniors. 
First, ninth graders. 
First, you know. 
However, we look to plan through that. 
Then that's would be our next step. 
So just what we were saying earlier in our remote instruction, it's going to be hard to match up what exactly the model will look like until we have the survey results from our teachers and for our families, so we can match it up certification-wise. 
My biggest concern is we have kids taking ap exams and getting those kids ready for that and getting those kids ready for the next level college. 
You know we. 
We have training as much face time with with staff. 
It's absolutely. 
I agree with you 
and I'm very 
I'm very thankful. 
You know working with the scta if we ever have to think about distance learning the fact that we'll be providing two and a half hours every day for our students so running the same schedule, just shortened periods. 
You know working on google classroom interchangeably now and consistently across all of our classrooms. 
You know just right now. 
Currently we have a tremendous amount of teachers that are undergoing pd, virtually to ensure that everything is is up and running and that they feel clarified and supported in that kind of work, but you're preaching to the choir. 
I couldn't agree with you more that this is a really challenging time. 
I have a high schooler myself 
and she's in a smaller district, doing an a b schedule. 
So I scratch my head a lot right now, so I I completely respect and understand and if the board would like us to look at the year-long date, just let us know 
and we'd be happy to accommodate.
, this this will go the, remote learning actually just went out. 
That survey just went out, but we can I mean I could send it on on. 
On remind in five minutes, if we wanted to say you know that we've changed the date, but it sounds like. 
Maybe that needs to be more of a discussion if we're looking to go that route meredith engine and then jimmy so on the remote learning. 
If a parent were to choose that model, I understand that we would want them to commit for the full year, because we are devoting staff just to that remote learning we're not using a teacher who may be inside the classroom, sometimes we're going to utilize the staff that, for whatever reason, has to be staying at home to be our remote teachers. 
That's the optimal plan, so at the elementary level, it works a little bit easier in that in that fashion. 
If I'm an elementary teacher and I'm out, I can conceivably teach any of those grade levels 
if I'm a librarian, obviously that certification, et cetera et cetera, it gets a little trickier at the secondary level, because if I'm a chemistry, teacher 
and 
and I'm out- 
and maybe I don't have as many students out for chemistry- 
you know- 
then what am I giving to that teacher in terms of work that they would be doing for that day. 
So one could say that she would switch what they're doing 
and now they're going to teach more science electives and they can support any of those students who are out needing science electives. 
So it's really going to boil down to looking at the hard numbers of students matched up with the teachers that we have. 
Should we not be able to match everybody up which 
I'm hopeful we will be able to, then we would need to start entering into some sort of live streaming or larger groups of google classrooms, where a teacher, instead of having a class of maybe 25 or 26 in a google classroom, we may have to have larger numbers, and 
so then that's why the year-long decision, or not doing it every quarter becomes very challenging for us. 
If I'm a teacher 
and I'm running a google classroom of 45 kids and 
now some that those classrooms want to go back
, what classroom are they going into? 
Where am I fitting them into 
so then you're having to change people's schedule? 
It's a lot of moving parts, it is and then, if, so we have 
so children are able to through their parents, choose whether they want to come back to school or not. 
Our teachers are not electing whether they're coming back to school. 
The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning are the teachers that have reasons why they cannot return, and so, even if tomorrow, you know three weeks after school started, all of our remote learners said well. 
This is for the birds. 
I don't like this. 
I want to go back to school. 
We wouldn't then have the ability to bring them back, because, even though we did the classrooms for them, we wouldn't at that point, have the ability. 
Would we not at this time, because again, with six feet, we are, you know down to the amount of numbers that we have, 
but if, if our numbers look as such, where the remote learning is a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms, let's say, for example, instead of them being 17, that might only be 13 or 14. 
So then we could start welcoming them back, but that would be based on almost you know, looking at each student individually and being able to see how we can schedule them back into school, which is probably a very physical impossibility in the next three weeks. 
It's a little hard with our secondary schools as a as a secondary mom. 
It is it it kind of does stink 
and there's no two ways about it: our children, no child, is going to get the best education this year. 
It's just not going to happen and something we're going to try our best we'll. 
Definitely try our best right. 
If one, let's say somerset had an influx of you know. 
80 percent of their kids wanted to stay home and remote learn that would open up a lot more room, but it wouldn't necessarily mean that we would do somerset where their children win every single day and the rest of them.
, we would be making decisions that are consistent for all students, but then we might be reappropriating staff to help out in other ways in other areas, and I don't want to put you on the spot, but it's okay. 
That's why we're here 
we're on the spot? 
Have we looked into sixth grade at all, because in my opinion sixth grade is that lost grade? 
It's a grade where they're a little too young to still stay home by themselves and not only just stay home for the day by themselves, but also teach themselves kind of you know get on 
this get on the schedule 
get on the computer. 
Do what you got to do? 
Keep yourself moving on that b day. 
Have we visited something that once we get all our numbers, because I know we can't really finalize anything until we get all these surveys and numbers, but once we get all those numbers, are we going to be able to maybe look at sixth grade going every day as a possibility?
, that's absolutely you know
, that's definitely a conversation that we've been having as as soon as we know what the numbers are. 
Will we be able to welcome back additional grades, and I would I would assume that we would be having these conversations with with all of you, our administrative team, obviously as well and sixth grade is one of those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off at, because we know that they could be 10 11 years old going into school, and I would not feel comfortable myself at times, leaving my child home for long periods,, and so, we've had those conversations and once we know the numbers we'll be able to come back and report if we're able to make any changes good. 
Thank you. 
So much, no problem, just a quick question. 
Some clarification!, piggybacking a little bit on what mr scavo said. 
Are we entering the year making an assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver 100 of content in regards to secondary curriculum? 
If that is the assumption that I think you said that we're almost entering into, I mean who's going to choose what topics and what's being covered. 
Are we letting different teachers different people it just it concerns me that we're entering, 
I know, there's no perfect answer and there's no scenario that can right that, under these circumstances that you've, given you 
but. 
I guess that makes more of mr scala's point is that if we're making the assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver content, we should be trying to wait till so many surveys come back and see how many kids we can actually get 
and. 
So right, I don't have a perfect answer for it, but I can tell you what we're doing to set up for that. 
I had a chair meeting a couple of weeks ago, so our instructional leaders in each department to talk about that, especially at the secondary level, and so we would be looking at our curriculum at what are the big ideas at the end of the school year. 
What is it that the students are expected to learn so they can. 
You know move forward and pass those classes and or regence exams, we're also hoping to have a little bit more guidance in terms of the state education department in terms of what they're going to do in relaxing standards and curriculum and testing so much in how they had canceled the regents. 
We don't hope for that. 
We hope more for choice so that these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents. 
If they want to take it and see what kind of grade they get, I don't, I don't think we're looking. 
I don't think- 
and I know 
you mean it this way, but we're not assuming we're not going to be able to get through our curriculum, but we want to be real with our families. 
The curriculum could look a little bit different than what it normally does, and I know our teachers again hard workers are already looking at that. 
We've had some conversation, for example around science lab hours, usually that's seat time 
now the state education department has relaxed that, and that could be also a virtual. 
So we've already started those conversations once we come back into. 
Schools in our department means that we've been having anyway, virtually we'll continue those talks and start looking at that together. 
So this at the secondary level state the new york state, creates the standards for apn regions 
right so haven't. 
Given us clarification, okay, is through is through the college board, and so we actually are, starting, as you know, a new ap capstone program at the high school, so those teachers that are gonna begin teaching it for us this year they just went through the training for that 
and right now, ap is holding tight to what they're doing, but we also know that at the last minute they made some changes around what they did: testing wise, virtually. 
So we are advocating- 
and I think mr o'keefe spoke about this earlier- while we have not heard a tremendous amount from our legislators at this time we have been advocating, through our local boces, our associations talking to talking to the college board and just hoping for some teamwork for relief, so that families know that you know we're not looking to make any decisions that are going to make impacts for the students, but we also have to be real and they have to work with us. 
So we're hopeful for that. 
No problem, aaron, the so by the weekend we will have the figures on how many people are opting for remote learning. 
Is that,, 
all and the way we have it now is they're being committed. 
They can make a commitment for one full year, just just for my identification. 
Let's suppose it came back to say 30 percent of our district, one, which could be right, which could be what it could be sure. 
What does that change? 
Anything for us with the ab days or or or as meredith said, the sixth grade situation would, let's say, 30 remote for the year. 
Would that change? 
You know what we're doing right now.
, absolutely so what I just said with business. 
Also gonna take you know. 
Where is the thirty percent? 
It could be heavily weighted on the younger children.
, you know, is a k12 pet families deciding they want to keep them home right. 
You know it really depends on the breakdown of the of the groupings and the grades of where that 30 percent is or is it leaning more on one side of the district versus the other, it's not as clean as just if it was thirty percent, but, spaced across the district. 
That would make it easier. 
We can see some movement, I'm just not sure that I could say for sure right now that it would be at the secondary level. 
We would just need to see where it is and just aggregate that and just look at it, and it also boils down to to you know certification areas too, as well. 
How much staff we have in in each area? 
I fully understand mr scala's position on that. 
I really do understand, but I'm trying to trying to look at this, as if you put out a survey tonight which is already gone, but if you put it out- 
and it said your one mocking period 
and you could change your mind, then kind of I would say that you really 
we're stuck with what we've got this is. 
This is the way it's got to be because you don't know from market period of marketing period, how many students you're going to have. 
Is that accurate? 
I mean, 
but, but that goes to back to what we said. 
We can't put out there that you can make the decision after each quarter. 
If we're not sure we're going to be able to offer that- 
and so I know it may have looked like it- was a little bit stricter than it sounds like the board was- was willing to move forward with 
and so again we're certainly open to putting in alternate language, and we could send it as as quick as you know, as soon as we're done here or first thing in the morning. 
I certainly don't want to prohibit anybody from not doing remote learning but again, it's it's. 
We have to be practical in the size of our school district, so we can't say we're going to be able to offer things that smaller school districts can right away, but it is prohibitive based on on the numbers. 
So,, we might be able to offer that and we might be able to offer more grades into our secondary schools. 
We might be able to offer more space for our elementary students. 
We just won't know until we see all of those numbers getting to getting that number that we're seeking this weekend will drive where we go next,, and that's why it's challenging to be able to share with our staff and 
with our community what remote learning will you know essentially look like as well? 
If I don't have enough staff, I can't guarantee that you're going to be in a google classroom with a live teacher. 
I might not be able to offer that it may be based on whatever elective or store or grade that you're in it could be some sort of like a live streaming, but 
but again it really. 
It depends on on the numbers of the students that we have up against our staff as well. 
Thank you, jim just just real fast to pick it back. 
I apologize. 
I walked out for a second, if only 75 of the families respond to the survey. 
So now there's 25 of the kids. 
We don't know what they're doing no the default is that they're coming to school.,! 
Thank you no problem, so I know with elementary the teachers. 
Usually take their lunch when the students have their lunch. 
How are we working that, if they're having a lunch in the classroom who will be supervising them so? 
We do have obviously aid support. 
We are also working with our principals because we know that we're probably going to need some additional help with that, but we also know that. 
You know that lunch is managed. 
I actually thought that there was some staff that was a part of the lunch periods that might be mistaken. 
I'd have to look at that, but we are. 
We are having conversation to ensure that we have the support we need for lunch, two more. 
Actually. 
What will clubs look like virtually? 
So that's 
that's another new and exciting question 
right. 
We definitely know that clubs are not going to be able to be maintained after school physically. 
We have started to work with an online platform called passport for good and it allows clubs to run virtually and note on all their activities attendance community service hours if a child is working any of those types of hours. 
So we have to enter into conversation with our teachers about what that could look like. 
We certainly don't want to not offer clubs, but you know once a week twice a week: what sort of activities? 
How will you meet with them? 
Will google me be a part of it? 
Those are the questions that we're looking to have moving forward around clubs and one more with the staggered start times. 
Those are students still changing for gym class. 
We will not be changing for gym and we will not need to because we have moved team sports to the end and we're looking to do more. 
You know personal fitness that isn't rigorous, but we would not. 
We would not be looking to have any any. 
You know contact in that manner for our students 
[Music]. As I sat here tonight. 
I thought about saying absolutely nothing 
and I really don't know where to begin. 
I don't have a specific question. 
I can tell you that I'm incredibly angry internally right now 
and it's not at anybody in this room, but 
I thought that, I haven't organized my thoughts completely they're. 
Just bouncing around in my head, but I want to say a few things. 
First, I want to say that you did an outstanding job in the most difficult of circumstances. 
You've put together a plan. 
Every school district is in the same exact boat that we are in questions asked tonight by rob, alex laura meredith everybody here great questions, and we don't have the answers to any of those questions and we are going to be surprised. 
I think greatly by the things that we find. 
I think that you know people could look at what's going on here tonight and they may think that all of us agree on this model and think that this is what we have to do. 
I'm sure there are people watching this tonight streaming or 
we'll watch it later on 
and they'll think that if you're sitting here, I'm sitting here 
and I'm quiet that I must agree with this plan- 
and I think it's wonderful 
and I'm going to tell you that I do
n't it's rotten, it's a rotten plan. 
That's going to do tremendous damage to our children. 
I've been teaching for over 22 years. 
Now I can remember when I started there was goals 2000., maybe some people in the room. 
Remember that maybe you don't, then there was no child left behind and then most recently there was common core there's, never a time in which it seems like a bad idea, 
can't come about a bunch of garbage and nonsense that does anything but improves the education of our children. 
As I sat here tonight and I watch that slideshow 
and I watch those desks sitting so far apart. 
I thought what kind of dystopian period of time have we entered into where we look at this, and we accept this as the quote-unquote, what I hate to say the new normal, it's not normal to me. 
It's not acceptable to me. 
I want you to know that if it were up to me solely, I would defy the governor. 
I would send all of our children back to back to school. 
I would give them that opportunity. 
I believe that his edicts are completely unrealistic in terms of delivering a sound education to our children and I believe they are not well-based in terms of research and data and so on. 
So when we look at how many children have ended up with covid and what's happened to them, there's no question that covet exists. 
In my mind, I lost one friend to it. 
I almost lost a second several who had it very badly who thought they might lose their lives. 
So there's no question that covet exists. 
However, when I look at the numbers and when I look at children getting covered, what I see is that our response is disproportionate to what is going on and we are willing to just fall in line and listen to the leadership of this state, this country and do these things- 
and I know there are people who feel like me, and I know there are people who don't feel like me, a third of the survey respondents who have said I'm not comfortable sending my child to school, and I am all about parental choice. 
If you do not feel comfortable sending your child to school, then I encourage you not to I encourage you to homeschool. 
I encourage you to use the remote option if you're not comfortable with that. 
However, I feel, like I've, been denied my choice, which is to send my child to school. 
I'm willing to tolerate that risk based upon what I know, because I think that the damage being done to my child that still is in in school and the damage being done to other children is tremendous. 
I taught remotely for the last what three four months of school 
and when I tell you that I did as good of a job as anyone could do with live instruction every single day. 
All right. 
I worked very hard to do what I did and I watched kids slide into the great abyss and some of those children that I watched slide are supposed to go off. 
The princeton this fall are supposed to go to. 
Cornell are supposed to go to. 
You know you name the school 
and 
and they're going columbia and so on. 
But yet I've watched each one of them slip 
and I've watched a few hold on, 
and I've watched the most needy students that I taught completely slip
, we're not getting that back. 
We are not, and here we are and here's where we're going 
so I'll leave on this particular note. 
Sometimes it's real easy to just go along 
and I feel terrible for people like you, folks, the administration here
, it's simple and I'm in the same boat as an educator. 
It's my job! 
It's how I support my family and live my life and as a result of that, I'm forced to comply, because if I don't I'm out of a job but the solutions, we've come up with they're, not good solutions, they're, terrible solutions, and they are solutions that are going to harm each and every one of our children. 
And at some point I do believe that people who feel the way that I feel are going to have to think long and hard about how we stand up and demand what we want for our children that we think is best. 
I just want to say before I ask my last two questions that was well said bill. 
I I feel exactly the same. 
We do so well said. 
I just want to talk about the boces, because we're also feeling some questions today about boces. 
As I mentioned earlier in the meeting community meeting where there was only 50 people in that meeting,, where there was only 50 people, there was 50 how many people 50 volunteers 
and then all of our staff as well go ahead.
, you know. 
Having worked for boces for going into my 29th year, you know over the decades things change school districts go to block schedule. 
Kings park did at one point: school districts for financial purposes, decided that you know we don't want to send two bus routes to boces. 
We only want to have one route and, as a result,, they basically said to our agency look whirly standing in the am this year, or will he sending seniors in the am and juniors in the pm and they've changed things so that it accommodated him and 
our bosses always accommodated him and my concern with some of the questions with some of the students that are in cte classes, that are that are scheduled to go to carpentry and auto body, and- 
and you know whatever other programs they signed up for- is that transportation becomes an issue if we have an a day b day, those particular subject areas you have to be there every day you can't teach somebody how to sand the fender and paint it remotely. 
It's just not something that can happen, so I suggested earlier that maybe we should call boces, eastern south post and say look we pay anywhere from 14 to 20 000 tuition depending on the particular student. 
If they have an iep or not or if they need additional services, we can only stand in the am because of the situation. 
We're in you know and get their feedback. 
You know, I don't believe we. 
I don't think they want to lose the tuition.
, I agree and and uh- 
and you know I did appreciate that idea, because I'm not I 
I know you're in western 
but it was just you know, shared with us, the model that they were running, 
and so we traditionally we're share 
we're told what our schedule is, but we are quite large and I agree with you- 
we pay an exorbitant amount of money into both season. 
It's certainly worth the conversation. 
The second thing we have in-house cte classes where we have cosmetology, and you know using the same concept- 
I mean if we have to get our kids there every single day. 
The suggestion that you know we've we've done in you know boces is that we try to allocate you know: 
the junior students first year, students 
the am session this way they could take that bus up every single day right and just have to get a ride home two two days out of the week 
and then the pm students or the second year. 
Students would actually attend cosmetology and pm because many of them may have driver's license and license. 
It's just another suggestion to be able to accommodate that population of kids. 
That really need to be there five days a week, especially cosmetology students that have licensing and all that stuff which, by the way our cosmetology teacher, I mean she. 
She really just went above and beyond to ensure that the kids had the experience they needed, even if it was virtually. 
So I agree with you 
and I do appreciate that feedback 
and then just the last thing is more of a more of a comment 
and it's frustrating because I I hear what bill saying I hear 
and if you don't mind, I really do. 
Mr coggins, I. 
I don't want you to think or anybody to think that we just you know, laid low because of our jobs.. 
I think everybody knows I came from a district where we stood very tall against things that were coming down from the state education department. 
I think when you're talking about health, it's a little bit challenging, but I hope you understand- 
and I hope everyone in the community knows that at no point did. 
I think that I was doing this just because it was my job 
but because I really do want what's best for children like. 
I know all of us here, but I stand just as equally frustrated when you're out and you see people out and about in playgrounds and beaches and and whatnot 
and we're held to you know very different standards. 
But when I tell you that we're working 18, 19 20 hours to make sure we're given the best, I know it's not what we all want, but I do respect what you said 
and I really do appreciate that feedback. 
My last thing is really more of a statement and. 
You know when I look at the guidelines for opening in new york and it seems like they print a new one every week, because they change the rules so crazy,. 
You know you look at them. 
If I can say that you know john, when you said it was cryptic, it really is 
I mean you need to you know you can interpret this 50 differently.
,, but they have a mandatory column and then recommendations for best practices, which I don't understand, but it talks about ensure that social distancing, six feet at least six feet or a physical barrier is maintained between individuals while in school facilities on school grounds, including cafeterias, unless safety or care of activities such as moving equipment or elevating elevators traveling in common areas requires shorter distance of individuals. 
But then number two says: if social distancing is not possible, individuals must wear acceptable face governments
, that's exactly how we interpret what we talked about earlier if we have to move kids back into a classroom. 
The way I interpret this- and maybe legal legal counsel, give me you know 
their opinion right is that if we had to move desks closer together, to be able to not be able to, you know, accommodate the social distancing by putting masks on the kids, we would be able to do that 
and that's exactly how we started out our planning. 
If you remember we had looked at, I think it was the massachusetts model where we were looking to at least go no less than three feet 
and when we did that it was like everyone's high fiving each other everyone's coming back. 
This is great and I don't mean to put mr block on the spot, but we did receive guidance from legal and it looked as though that masks were not going to be appropriate alone, but we read the regulations the same as you. 
It was just as disappointing when we found out that was not to be mr o'keefe. 
The other day, you'd mention that if we were able to go three feet, we could accommodate every student. 
Every kid come back. 
Every student we had every building make up a class for three feet, and so we were able to say that if parents felt safe for their children to return that we were able to do that our hands are very tied. 
In terms of that, and you know again, I don't mean to put you on the spot, mr black, but you may want to jump in then 
it was a few weeks ago where you know we thought that just mask face covering was going to be sufficient. 
If you couldn't maintain the social distancing, but then the governor's office came out and clarified that and said that you have to have that physical barrier and. 
So that then took away our what we thought was our ability to have face masks, but the face coverings are okay in the hallways and the bus.
,,, there's!! 
It's not that's!, nothing makes sense, but that is. 
That's 
that's what we're following so aaron. 
As we all know, I should have had a swivel chair, john I'm just saying. 
Should I have a swivel chair, as we all know, education is is not going to be pretty this year and we want to give our children as much as we can 
and we've spent so many years working on this educating the whole child and worrying about social, emotional. 
I'm, the most emotional person shouldn't be talking about this, 
but. 
So a couple of things, our most vulnerable, social and emotional. 
As we see little children adapt much better. 
You see a two-year-old in target with a mask on it's, not a problem.
, my teenagers find the mask, uncomfortable and, and so hours. 
Six through 12, in my opinion, are our most mentally vulnerable 
and I just feel like, because things are so different. 
Are they going to be able to just go down to the guidance counselor just go down to you know, or things like that like, where they want to just go. 
Take five minutes with the guidance counselor or even the school psychologist. 
Is that still going to be fully in place opened to everyone? 
Is there also? 
I know that. 
I know that over the the distance learning period last year that our sagem north sel chairs they 
they did a tremendous job. 
Having a google meet also are are things for mental health in place 
and then my other question is what does recess look like in in covid land in elementary? 
I think, because I think I lightly brushed over that. 
So I'm glad that you asked me about that because you know so last year was the big thing that we were taking away: five minutes from lunch and recess 
and uh, there's always bigger fish to fry people. 
So, with that they're gonna be allowed to go outside 
they're gonna be allowed to run it all off. 
Are they allowed to play on the play gyms? 
Are they allowed to play ball with one another, or is it you're going to stay there and just run in place 
and you're going to stay there and run in place 
and? 
I mean, I think. 
Realistically they are children, we're going to do our best to set up so that it's a safe environment, but there's not going to be boredoms out there if they are playing ball. 
I can't tell you that we will they're going to be, as I said earlier, rotating between the fields that we have the playground equipment that we have and then the basketball courts, so we would obviously have equipment outside for that. 
We do have sanitizing stations that we will be utilizing for the students but again. 
You know, as I said I think in the beginning. 
We do not want our students to come back feeling like we're in jail, and the first thing that we had on our slides was the social, emotional well-being of our students 
and I'm very proud of the program that we have built here, and we are just looking for unique ways whether it be virtual, more push in from our sel chairs. 
You know all project kindness, all of those things we'll still have them this year. 
They just may look a little bit different in terms of the mental health staff, ms graham and the office of student services. 
Now under the direction of mram better with ms graham, we will be deploying guidance counselor. 
All of those different all of those services are still in place, but we see ourselves doing more proactive lessons as students come in and more push in into our classrooms, so that students feel comfortable. 
We know the issues that we're seeing out there again. 
Our sel chairs have sent out a survey to our students at the secondary level, and I agree with you at the elementary level we're going to be doing more proactive, resiliency skill type of activities with them. 
Our health teachers for the past year have been building a health workbook for the elementary schools that are rooted in all the resiliency skills that we have been studying using the university of pennsylvania. 
So we're really excited about what we can deploy for our students, and you know it goes back to
, we are so worried about curriculum and we are we are. 
We are going to work to ensure that all big ideas as much as we possibly can until this is all over is taught, but our first charge is just making sure that those kids feel happy and safe and healthy coming in and our staff as well. 
Our staff has not only been teaching from home prior to the summer, but they also had their own issues that they may have been you know undergoing. 
So that is our number one goal here. 
Thank you no problem, mr keith. 
Mr science.. 
One of the important questions that was asked this morning was about safety and about how kids are wearing their masks on the bus they're getting off the bus 
and now they're walking into the building with their masks on maybe a hood on
, maybe a hat on and 
they're not going to be as easily identifiable as they have in the past. 
One of the suggestions was to wear lanyards with maybe id cards. 
I'm just wondering what else. 
If there's any other suggestions, if there's, how are we gonna, I mean? 
Obviously health and safety is number one concern that that is a that is a major concern of not being able to recognize kids and especially, ninth graders, who are now new to the building. 
So we don't know any of them to begin with, and and sixth graders are now going in there right. 
So there's going to be a lot of unfamiliar faces and even more unfamiliar with me.
, so not too unfamiliar only because we do have our transition meetings for all fifth graders going into the sixth grade and then all eighth graders going into the ninth grade, and we did those virtually over the past few months prior to the ending of school. 
So all teams at the high school level, in conjunction with their middle school and then middle school to elementary school. 
We met on every single student, not just some, but all so they were able to physically see a picture of the student talk about the student all of those things, so so we're hoping right that there are similar, some familiar faces coming in but, like we had talked about this morning, the use of the student badges. 
We have never truly enforced the way that we need to now, but we would have to ensure that the students are maintaining that and showing that because they will be wearing masks as they come in. 
However, we are also spacing things out, so the kids aren't coming into school in mass quantities, so should, in fact you know, prior to all the badges coming out. 
You need to slip down just so. 
We can kind of recognize you put back up and go back in. 
I think we would feel safe and comfortable in terms of that, but we'll be working with our staff working with security and seeing what other measures that we can, you know put into place. 
John. 
I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that. 
Just to pick it back up. 
If we're going to have the kids wear their id cards just a matter of how fast can we get the idea?? 
That's the 
that's the only thing, 
and that's why I say in the beginning. 
We may just have to do the old-fashioned, put it down for a second, so I can see, but you know our staff is pretty astute and granted the ninth graders. 
We may not recognize them all, but we all you know. 
We know our students here 
so, that's obviously 
another concern would be now 
we have them wearing their i
d cards 
and of course, we all know that 10 to 15 of the kids are either going to lose them or forget them. 
Do we have a mechanism to reprint them in the building daily so that everybody has one? 
Thank you,, so just for the community, we we are able to duplicate that., thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss any other questions we moved on. 
I just wanted to make sure that we at least took a poll of where we stand. 
As on remote learning, did we want to take a poll and leave it at one full year of a commitment? 
Did we want to talk about a half year? 
Did we want to talk about a quarter? 
I think it's important that we do it now, so that we don't wait until last. 
Second 
and we're changing[Music]. 
I understand what rob was saying before about this. 
I'm just curious why it wouldn't be sufficient if we just changed the language to where we could evaluate if it were possible and had people understand that it could potentially be that long, but we could, of course, if situations allow we can, we can, we can shorten it and truncate the time period. 
Can I just ask a question to mr block: 
I mean 
I just just because I can foresee 
I'm sorry jim just because I can foresee something are 
we are 
we even legally allowed to tell somebody they're not allowed to come back? 
That's 
you know, that's a 
that's an unanswered question. 
You know 
and it's unprecedented from a legal standpoint, and 
you know I understand fully the operational issues from a legal standpoint. 
You're going to want to see more flexibility, because the concern is that family will say that being denied. 
My right education, it responds back, is no you're being educated, being educated remotely, but that's not the same type of education as an in-person education. 
So from a legal standpoint, I would recommend that there be some flexibility built in. 
I was actually going to state that if you were going to do that, still keep the year, but have a reevaluation the ability to be able to re-evaluate, as ms heinz said, that that's going to occur on a student-by-student basis.
, if there's a concern from a parent, but parents are maybe being a little bit, not almost misled, but don't not aware of the fact that there may be a re-evaluation, but that's something you may want to clarify, and you could do it in an interval period. 
You could do it. 
You know after the first quarter,, that's as a re-evaluation, for example. 
I mean. 
One of my concerns would be is that they realize what remote learning entails and they're 
I. This is not what I signed up for we're not going live, we're not doing this or not right, and then we get an influx of kids and now class sizes grow and we don't have the space to have everybody in. 
So I just I want to make sure that we have that flexibility
, I'm sorry jim 
[Music]., my position is 
I like what bill just said. 
My position was to get the true figures. 
The way it went out was probably the right way to go, so people aren't saying.
, I can experiment for a while and we never really get a true picture, but at the same time I think if you put it if the language was softened up to say, the possibility of a full year is real. 
However, you know there's going to be, independent cases that have changed, etc, etc. 
So we all know that we all know that this could all change, but to get the true figure up front. 
I think they have to be aware that this could be a full year of remote learning.., that's just my opinion. 
and I apologize. 
I don't have the survey in front of me. 
I don't, 
I think I said could be, but I don't recall, but we could certainly again put that out once we see the numbers and 
if, in fact we feel like, maybe families felt a little bit, it was too strong and they're, not really quite sure we can. 
We could send a call out. 
We could send out an email as quick as you know now, if we wanted to the reason why I asked that question is: is that we based that plan on every single student returning?
, we did so the issue is not space. 
The issue is scheduling.
, that's correct right!
, so I view it as well and and because of the six feet right, you know obviously space because of that, but the six feet parameters is what allowed us to go to this plane to accommodate every kid. 
They should be right. 
So if we don't have all if, if not all kids return, then we will have more space, obviously and then can bring back more kids. 
So so the thing is like I said: the issue is not the space matter. 
You know the plan was devised based upon every single student returning and that's why I suggested you know, maybe doing it 
once you know one or four times a year. 
You know. 
For that reason, I understand that it could be a nightmare scheduling. 
if the restrictions aren't lifted, I guess we have 13 kids. 
In a seventh grade, honest math class and we're looking at a schedule, you're going to look at the section 
say all right put them in mrs smith's class or put them in correct.
, so you know the issue is that you have this. 
You have the space, it's just more of a scheduling thing, and I would imagine that if more and more kids come back from remote learning, we could reassign teachers to classrooms.
,, and- 
and that's the point so in a year where we're already saying the curriculum's interrupted the day has been corrupted. 
That's the only thing that we wanted to minimize in the beginning and get a true account, because you don't want to be moving teachers around and upheaving schedules, but we can of course always hand select 
and. 
You know put students in as outliers who really do need to come back, but we didn't want to forget. 
I don't know who said it before. 
We just didn't want people thinking, I'm going to try it out for a week 
and if I don't like it 
I'll, go because we're just. 
That would be really good. 
A quarter you know, and that will give us enough time to do the planning and do the scheduling if we have, if we had to. 
I just think that the one year signing something this is one year, scaring heck out of people based upon the phone calls that I received today. 
So I guess we'll have to then decide. 
Are we doing flexibility? 
The flexible option, obviously is the best for everybody, but do we want to say one year or do we want to say by quarter, 
and I guess we'll vote on that. 
So if you want to do a full year, write it with flexibility, you can vote on that full year. 
Flexibility,, so just put we'll put our hands up 
and I'll 
just we'll count them all full year with flexibility or flexibility with re-evaluating every quarter.
, so, but maybe we could put what would be the best way to well. 
I think that what I suggested would be if you want to stay with the full year, but that you re-evaluate on a quarterly basis, because I just caution us to if we all of a sudden say flexibility, then people, you know 
I 
just we have to have a true account. 
School starts in two and a half weeks, and I I don't mean to be crafts about that, but we we really do, 
and so I think, mr black, the way that you had said it. 
I think you know it's a year, but we would be reevaluating it throughout the year for everybody. 
I 
I 
I like what he said. 
Does that mean?? 
I don't think that you're going to make that full commitment. 
I don't think you can quite frankly. 
So I think that the concern was being raised was that parents, under the impression that you know no matter what I do 
it's a year now
, if I commit it's a full year, that's not going to be the case. 
We're going to look at it on a quarterly basis. 
Again, it's change. 
There could be 
a week wake up tomorrow with an executive order which states that parents, you know, can make the choice on daily basis. 
You know so you know, so I. 
I think that what it's going to be is that the district will look at it. 
We're going to look at our operational needs, we're going to look at the parental needs and make you know an informed decision, but that the benchmark be on a quarterly basis. 
Would it help if we provided some sample language 
and then you're able to let us know if that language looks appropriate, because we can send that out. 
You know as quick as. 
You know sunday evening or monday morning for folks perfect. 
Thank you any other questions. 
All right. 
We are back in the agenda letter f approval of minutes. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr mike caruso second and by meredith opie. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried number two. 
We are in the visitors section public comment that pertains to the agenda. 
I'm just going to need those cards or, if you're going to call them, is fine too 
I'm going to call up the names we do have several. 
I just wanted to make a reminder announcement that the visitor section, the public comment is in fact a public comment. 
It's not a question and answer type of period, so I know that some of the cards that we are getting do have questions on them. 
I think possibly it's better. 
You know to if, if questions are asked, we can have them written down 
and we can take your email and we can have a response sent to you by email. 
If that's good or mr picarella, if you want, we can also include them in our forum on monday. 
That's fine right. 
I just think it would possibly be best to email or you know, speak with you separately regarding,. 
So the first gentleman, mr caputo, I'm sorry capuano, oh, my name is mike capuano. 
My daughter is brooke capuano. 
She goes to sagem, you have an excellent school here 
and you have an excellent school because you have the best teachers in the country. 
I believe, when you take the teachers away, you have a bunch of buildings here:,, to think that you're going to lock a child in a room with a bunch of books 
and if you could fast forward 10 years that, like a doctor or a lawyer, is going to walk out of that room. 
It's just not going to happen.
, now the main reason that we're all here is the six foot: six foot: six foot: six foot- 
that's all we're here for why? 
Don't we tell everybody that that's a farce? 
If you build the partitions around the desk, the six foot is not necessary and I called osha 
and I called the governor's hotline.
, if you build the glass petition, the teachers are worried. 
Also. 
I understand that if you build a glass petition against the front, the teachers could walk in the back and they would be behind the petition. 
711 protects their cashiers and they all come in when it's time for their shift and 
they're back there. 
Furthermore, the children could walk in behind their petitions and take their masks off. 
The teachers could be up there with the blackboards and take their masks off and everything would be back to normal. 
This is all we're all here, because we're refusing to build the petitions. 
You could take that desk. 
There's schools that have taken that desk and they divide it like this boom and boom 
and there's four children on that desk 
and it's totally legal you can be. 
When you put a mask on then or any kind of petition, they said you could be nose to nose. 
I was just in a restaurant that was so packed the booth, the person right behind me I turned around. 
I was looking right in his face. 
I called the hotline from there because- and they said as long as there's a petition, there was a petition in between the booths and the petition was only this tall. 
I was looking in the guy's eyes and they said there's no regulations for the height of the petition.
, so all we need is the petition, and all this is gone.
, second of all, second solution: why don't you just have the people that want to come into school and the teachers that want to come into school come in and the ones that want to stay home and the children that want to stay home stay home instead of forcing the ones that are horrified to come in to come in and the ones that are desperate to come back in. 
My daughter wants her teachers and she wants her school 
and she wants her friends.
, what? 
If all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in? 
Everybody who needed to came in to to help 
and they kept america going to mind odds that the schools are the only ones that let us down now, as this gentleman said these kids in five years, if we could fast forward to the ones that are starting now, they won't be able to read and write. 
I don't know how many people go to europe, but our kids already can't read and write. 
We are kids in college. 
That can't add this is the death knell of america. 
This is not some small thing here that you're deciding and there's no reason. 
These are guidelines. 
Schools all around you hop hog everything else open five days. 
This is your decision to do in the generation right here. 
Remember that this is the beginning of the end of america,,. 
We hope that they rescind this, but if they don't rescind this, this few years here will be known as the covid dummies. 
They won't make it into college. 
They won't do anything and there's no reason 
and. 
Lastly, I want to say, if you open the schools, why bother the first kid or the first teacher that gets covered you're going to close all of sagem? 
So this is all the foss all this money, the reopening programs and everything. 
It's all a big fuss,
, it's it because this is being treated like the bubonic plague. 
Mr capuano
, I'm sorry there's a three minute time limit.
, thank you. 
Studies all around the world have opened up. 
There's not one case. 
The ymca tracked their own tracing 40, 000. 
Kids, not one mr kevin. 
Thank you very much for coming. 
We appreciate it. 
Thank you so much for listening 
and I wanna say. 
Lastly, the governor said this is for us to talk not three minutes. 
I listened to this young lady for three hours. 
That was not the guidelines. 
You're worried about guidelines, guidelines, the governor said the people should be able to come in and talk not listen to. 
You guys tell me what to do with my child.. 
Thank you very much., miss muchitash. 
can I just start sure um, my name is lauren mukhitash 
I've been in station for 13 years 
now I have elementary age children, I'm going to jump the agenda. 
I'm sorry,, I'm going to jump the agenda a little bit and go to item 12. 
there's been a proposal to create a divor diversity task force in sacrum, central school district. 
I'm here to voice my support for the creation of that task. 
Force sachem student body is comprised of 25 percent racial minority students. 
Our e and l students represent a staggering 98 different languages spoken within this district of 13 000 students. 
Our students represent a multitude of cultures, religions and abilities representation matters. 
Our multifaceted student body deserves to see themselves reflected in their teachers and administrators in the books they have access to and read 
and then the curriculum they are taught. 
So I would just plead with the board. 
don't render this to a toothless subcommittee with no power. 
There are lots of things that I love about sagem, and I think that this is a step in the direction to improve upon what we already have a strong foundation for. 
Thank you. 
I'm sorry. 
Next is. 
Mr warren 
hi, my name is jason moore, I'm a parent in the community, sageman graduate. 
I would like to make a plea to the board: value and respect the school community by maintaining a high standard of transparency and communication at all times, but particularly in times of crisis. 
The communication from the central office and the board has been unacceptable. 
It is essential for every member of the school community students, teachers and families to be constantly updated at all times about every aspect of the reopening process. 
The meeting this meeting was not advertised to the school community at large. 
There were five parents outside barely and they left as soon as possible, communicate the following. 
communicate the following to community immediately. 
How will we ensure that our remote students are receiving an equitable education? 
I can't accept that they will receive a subpar education. 
You've put in your email that I received. 
While I was standing up front says it will not be the same. 
I need it to be equitable. 
I need my child to get an equitable education. 
They need to be live instruction and ongoing assessment. 
We need to figure it out. 
We need to put programmers in place. 
We need to figure it out. 
It has to be figured out. 
We cannot make an exception where part of our school community is receiving a subpar education. 
It's not acceptable, not acceptable to me should not be acceptable to you 
and it's not acceptable to your teaching staff. 
I know that for a fact. 
Secondly, a building space plan must be made available to the teacher to the parents of this community with individual room measurements and the capacity to maintain authentic social distancing at all times, and I need to know about the source of ventilation. 
I need to know what the school buildings look like. 
If you're telling me 17 kids in a classroom, I need to know that there's room for 42 square feet for every 17 one of those students I need. 
I need that in writing. 
Before I even think about sending my child back, I need clear opportunities for all parents to participate in this process. 
I shouldn't stumble upon this. 
I should be knowing about this weeks in advance. 
I need specific criteria for testing and tracing in all school buildings. 
I need a contingency plan for what happens when the rate of transmission rises above three percent. 
What do I do with my child? 
How do I make accommodations? 
I need to know these things before we put our kids on those buses. 
It's unacceptable that you're asking me to put a remote survey in place by friday, and your first parent meeting is on monday. 
That's unacceptable. 
The parents need to know. 
What's going on, the school community needs to know. 
What's going on, the teachers need to know, everybody needs to know it's unacceptable,. 
I need you to do a better job of communicating with the school community. 
Most important details need to be related to about our children's education in the future. 
address these issues immediately. 
The students, the teachers, the families in this community deserve at least this much. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much. 
Miss favaro campbell
, I'm michelle for campbell. 
I wanted to just address the board about the diversity task force. 
As all of you know, I started that email and requested that it be put on the agenda and that you all consider creating one. 
It's been 10 years that I, my daughter, started she's going to be a senior now so 10 years ago 
I actually started talking to a lot of district office, which is very changed now. 
Maybe mr scavo might have been on the board of ed back then I don't remember, but most of you are not we're not then. 
It's been 10 years, since my family started talking about the having more diversity and representation within sachem 
and I'm really excited to see it finally make an agenda. 
I want to also make it really clear that it's about race, religion and abilities. 
I want children in wheelchairs to see themselves in books in their classrooms. 
I want children with autism to know that they are just as represented as every other kid in every princess book in every superhero story, and I want to help show our curriculum expand to teach children that kids with down syndrome can be teachers, because there are stories of preschool teachers who have down syndrome and kids, who are deaf and blind can grow up to graduate harvard law, school and become disability advocates and travel the entire world, and I right now we just don't show that we don't have the staff. 
We don't have diversity in our staff. 
We don't have diversity even in the books that they see when they walk into a classroom. 
So I just wanted to thank you all for putting it on the agenda tonight and for entertaining the idea and to understand that it's actually bigger than one issue
, it's about every kid at sagem walking into their classroom, walking through hallways and right now, where I know reopening and dealing with covid, but this has been 10 years actually a little bit more in the making and sacrum is going to go on long before my daughter, who's going to be a senior and my son is going to be a freshman in high school they're going to be gone, and I don't want to leave that task force 
like I want this to be 10 years from now. 
Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program has a very different experience than what they had, and so that's really important to me that you all knew that. 
So. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss sanders,, everyone, oh, everyone, maria sanders,! 
I am a parent. 
I would like to just make a statement in respect to the reopening committee. 
I 
I was a member of the reopening committee 
and I just would like to express my disappointment in the fact that the committee had no part in the actual planning or process of of the plan that was presented to the community. 
My understanding was that we would be part of that process, but instead we had two meetings where we were basically given the list of directives as administration and and the board of vet had planned. 
So basically, we got a sneak peek and the ability to ask a few questions, though I certainly respect the time and effort and energy that administrators put in, and I will not take anything away from that. 
You fail to utilize the very volunteers that you asked for because there was a tremendous amount of talent within that grouping 
and we certainly could have helped you in putting together this plan for myself having students in second in middle school and high school. 
I recognize that this plan is not going to be adequate for them and again, 
though, I understand right now, we we're hoping that the testing standards are loosened. 
The value of a full-time education will not be, and these children cannot get a full-time education when they're in school. 
Fifty percent of the time they're only seeing a teacher, fifty percent of the time 
and they're they're sitting home in front of a computer for the other 50 that amounts to 10 days a month when normally they would be in school for five days a week. 
So I just asked that in the future, when you come to the community- 
and you ask us to step up and come in and help you really utilize us, because our voice really has not been heard. 
That's it! 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
miss williamson, nicole williamson,,, miss cologne, everyone, I'm josephine scalon. 
I have a soon to be second and third grader, and I just have a question because I'm still undecided about the virtual verse going to action school. 
If you go to school and you start in the school, do you have the option of then going virtual? 
Would that be an option? 
So I'm sorry 
go ahead. 
I'm sorry! 
So we're in this portion of the agenda. 
We're not allowed to do back and forth and answer questions. 
If you'd like we can have your question written down and leave your contact and we will answer any question that you have. 
I can promise thanks. 
Thank you very much. 
Is it allison? 
Is it on the court? 
Is her email on the card? 
There's a phone number on the card. 
Do you want to put an email perfect? 
Thank you so much, the next one was also several questions. 
Would you prefer to contact this person as well? 
I mean I mean he's been waiting, so if he wants to ask him and then it's miss rep rapuno,, thank you,! 
That's all! 
For the first section we are on page two at the bottom number. 
Three business items consent agenda a through c, and I have a motion. 
motion by bill cogan second, by laura slattery. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried sorry bottom of page three personnel consent agenda. 
A through l. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
This is kate bleedin. 
So this is an unusual way to welcome many of our new staff, as we are having our first kind of live forum most of the time we have folks here to welcome them in person, and some of you are virtual. 
We would like to welcome all of our new staff that we vetted through really intense interview processes this summer with our administrative staffs in the building and staff members, faculty involved in the whole process and. 
That includes clerical custodial teachers, teachers, assistants and I think we have also gotten to the administrative section. 
Did I catch that correctly?
, so we're through the l- 
and I just want to welcome those folks that are in consent, agendas,. 
So far, thanks number five is support staff consent agenda a through j. 
Can I have a motion motion by meredith second, by jimmy and caruso. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried christie. 
Did you want me to stop again cause? 
I think you have michael there. 
joining us today is michael emanuel. 
He is over here to my left, the far right, if you wanted to just stand and give yourself a wave, michael, is joining us today, as the network and systems administrator 
he's been a integral part of our technology, staff who have been working with jack renda in it. 
We're really excited about all the great things that we're going to continue to get the growth for our technology as we push through and put our smart schools investment through and and enhance the use of our technology for our students and our staff. 
So welcome michael, we are on the top of page 12 number six personnel administrators consent agenda. 
A through g motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried, we'd like to take a moment to recognize two other folks in the audience today. 
joining us is dennis mcelherne. 
If you want to give a wave- not quite sorry, I'm trying to stay on top of it here. 
They're. 
This close, this close sorry guys a little more suspense 
we're going to be towards the top of page 14 letter h, probationary appointment of the administrative personnel. 
There you go andy. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins? 
Second by mr wadawa discussion, discussion. 
I will be voting on this in the next two personnel items.. 
My reasons are the same as they've been for the past several board meetings concerning central administrative positions. 
That is, I believe, the new superintendent should be part of the process in any administrative appointments.. 
What I must make perfectly clear is that these candidates, as well as those from the prior meetings, are qualified and capable of the positions to which they are being offered, and I would fully support them if the new superintendent was part of the process. 
So this is a process, negative vote and nothing to do with the personnel. 
The new superintendent is close. 
I mean we're almost there 
and we certainly have qualified staff who could perform these functions for a short time as interims, so that for that reason, and that reason alone, I'm voting on the next three administrative positions. 
I must stress it has nothing to do with the individuals. 
I fully support them and would support them in the future. 
Mr kieran, just because you asked for a discussion and for the public and anybody at home by losing our superintendent, our assistant superintendent and our special ed director
, we would have left three positions open where we would have needed interims and just for argument's sake, mr o'keefe. 
What is the going rate for an interim at that level per day? 
For which position are we speaking? 
Let's say it's: the superintendent rates vary, but a going rate for superintendent is probably 12 to 1300 a day, and then what about the assistant super? 
An assistant superintendent, depending upon which position it could be 800 to 1000 a day and an executive director of special ed would also probably be in a similar range, a minimum of 800 a day. 
So what and- 
and I don't necessarily disagree with your argument- 
but what what we did was we took a vote to have these positions filled. 
We had three people doing five people's jobs and it between losing that on a normal year is almost impossible, but losing it during covet is is impossible and we put things into motion to have these positions filled by qualified people to save that money, and this is money that I mean we we already just talked about taking custodians off- that we don't even know if buildings are going to get cleaned in time. 
Now we want to take more money out by filling these positions with indoors. 
I think that that's a slippery slope if we go down that path.
, I appreciate what you're saying my. 
My position is that a superintendent of schools,, is the single most important person in the district and totally accountable to us and the district for making decisions and to have a superintendent of schools, not part of the process. 
Even though a new superintendent come in and doesn't know, the personnel is certainly going to ask the qualified people who who they are and do cement and be part of the interview process. 
I 
I think that's even more important than the saving of a few dollars here and there, but that's 
I mean I
, I see I'm alone in that position, but I stand by it. 
I 
I understand where you're coming from I just if I don't appoint somebody until september 1
, that's a long period of time at thirteen hundred dollars a day, eight hundred dollars a day, and while it seems like a few dollars here and there over a three month period that we haven't had people that it starts to add up, and when we need money down the line, I would be afraid that we put it on in a room 
is when we had qualified people who could take these positions immediately? 
I will remind you of your fiscal prudence soon, [Laughter] alex just because we're having a discussion, 
so mr 
kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight
, I I have personally known all of them. 
So it's without hesitation that I think that they are the best fit for sachem. 
I don't care who our superintendent is. 
I've trusted mr o'keefe, as our interim superintendent, to make the recommendations, and I 100 percent agree that any superintendent coming in will not find any better candidates than the ones we're putting forth tonight. 
Opposed motion is carried dennis, we're going to start with andrew larson, so andrew just want to welcome you to the high school north principalship
, andy has been a teacher in our schools. 
He's been in personnel, he's been in an elementary hiawatha principleship, a sagamore principalship, an ap and two of our high schools, and now he's joining the ranks of the leader ship in north 
and we'd like to welcome you and wish you all the best we are on letter. 
I probationary appointment of the executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion. 
motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
[Applause] dennis mclehern. 
He's 
he's welcome back to sacham. 
He has been in our school district working as a school psychologist, an assistant to coordinator for special education. 
He left for a short stint to go over to north bab as a director over there 
and we're really lucky to have him back and part of our team as the executive assist executive director for special education. 
Welcome back [Applause] and letter 
j is an approval of an saa agreement for the executive executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion motion by ms slattery? 
Second, if I miss volpe, all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 14. contracts consent agenda. 
A through t. 
Can I have a motion ocean by mr coggins second by mrs wadwa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 20.. 
It's an action, itemist number, a mandated new york state board, training for matthew, bauman and robert scavo, all in favor, get kind of a motion motion by mrs volpe second by mr man. 
Caruso all in favor opposed motion is carried number b. 
It's an appointment of board committee members. 
Can I have a motion motion by miss lottery second by mr scavo. 
Any questions all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
Letter c. Is a board of education retreat? 
Can I have a motion motion by ms wado, a second by mr bauman, all in favor. 
Any questions sure I just want to make a quick comment:, especially since we're being fiscally prudent, a retreat is not like gurneys or something it's where we all sit in a room and talk. 
I just want to make sure that that's clear, because we are not going on vacation, though, because my first year I was prepared for gurney's 
and then we sat in the same set library. 
Thank you. 
We are on the top of page 22.. 
I'm sorry 
are we 
I apologize. 
Can I all in favor opposed motion is carried the top of page 22 donations consent agenda a through c. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggin second by miss ottawa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried number 10 at the bottom of page 22 committee on special education consent agenda, a through b motion by miss volpe. 
Second by mr mancaruso, all in favor opposed motion is carried number 11 monthly reports. 
So we there was a question from the community about when the committees would start meeting and how I think that, maybe, if people that were leading these committees, we want to maybe set some dates. 
We could do something virtually 
I'd like to see the budget committee start talking about if there was a possible mid-year cut and look into any and all options that there was. 
I don't know if there was anything else that you may want to look into, but that's just one that I thought of. 
I don't know about the legislative committee. 
If mr kiernan has anything for the legislative committee,, all right number, 12, we are back on public comment. 
This portion of the public comment will be on any and all items that anybody wants to speak at. 
That's not on the agenda, and everyone will have three minutes to discuss and, like we said before, this is not a q a and a back and forth, but we do want everyone to be able to be heard. 
That wants to be heard.
, the first one is miss young [Music]., I press this., thank you for waiting for so long. 
Thank you. 
You guys have been outside the season board of education, members and community. 
It's come to my attention that vp sarah waterworld wore a bill.
,, we're a blm t-shirt at a board of education meeting. 
This is unacceptable. 
I can respect a person's right to free speech and to have their opinion. 
However, blm is a political movement and it does not belong at our border bed meetings or in our schools and indoctrinations. 
The definition of a racist is paramount in the name of black lives matter. 
The name indicates that black lives matter over the other races. 
This is unacceptable and this racism does not belong, including the blm is putting itself over our law enforcement, which many of our community are employed and of all races this once again making blm a black organization. 
Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has they have not registered as a charitable organization. 
We do not know whether the blm t-shirt, that was worn was for the black lives foundation or movement in either case. 
It has no right if any one of the board members wore my hat supporting trump, I'm sure the same thing would happen. 
The apology that was put on facebook was cynical and scolding. 
Call us as all races and insisting blm is not is not a political issue. 
Last I checked. 
Everyone in america had the same rights regardless of race, sex, color and sexual orientation. 
As specific cases of discrimination are happening in our community, then we must address those issues. 
What offended me is the use of rap music before sporting events, glorifying women's segregation, drug use and the cursing and the songs with the word and in it this is not acceptable. 
If we are going to talk about discrimination, it can it's got to be used both ways. 
So, let's start by banning that bml, not political, tell that to the murder black trump supporter bernal tramell. 
Furthermore, the disgusting political use of blm as an attack on our police and blue lives is not acceptable. 
Our community of all sects and races is made up of law enforcement. 
Blm is declaring war against all blue lives matter. 
Miss young there's a three-minute time limit. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much, miss, so conor. 
Thank you very much for waiting. 
I know that it's been a while 
okay.
, I am beyond angry at what is going on with our children.
, we are not doing the right thing by our children in any way, shape or form at this point in time whether we want to send our children to school or keep them home. 
Neither of those options currently are acceptable. 
I sent everybody board members in email. 
I got one reply challenged every one of your board members to go and spend 10 minutes in one of the one of the classrooms. 
On the first floor in the second floor of one of the high schools did any of you do that? 
I didn't think so. 
Yet you all think it's fine, obviously that we have no ventilation in the classrooms for crying out loud. 
We have to have special ventilation in the malls and other businesses, but where our most vulnerable are we don't? 
None of you would work in these classrooms in the current conditions, none of you. 
So why would you think it's okay for our children to be in there even before this, but 
definitely now now the air in those classrooms just stands there, because there's no movement, there's,, nothing and covert will stand in the air until it falls down on somebody so you're putting our children in an environment that is guaranteeing that if somebody has gold, but it's going to get on all the rest of them horrendous
, it's despicable and now I'm hearing that remote learning is going to be a joke. 
That's not okay! 
Either!, I don't want my child in one of those rooms. 
I want my child safe, but my child is taking five ap classes next year, which means he needs a robust distance learning program. 
But my understanding is we're not doing that. 
Am I incorrect? 
No. 
So what we're doing to our children is despicable and you should all be ashamed of yourself just a second. 
Mr block, just a second, mr kyle 
I'll get your answer question right now. 
I had a conversation with him. 
You know, I know that you were asking the question about the being restricted in terms of the assembly, but 
it's pursuant to the governor's executive order, one of the number of executive orders 202.45, I looked. 
I believe I looked at that one, and that was talking about social media. 
This is okay, I'm just gonna back up just a little bit just so we can keep our space now. 
It talks about non-essential gatherings., and this is not essential. 
That's correct as long as while we're virtual, because you still have the option of being virtual, the board decided to assemble. 
so so you guys decided. 
This was not essential. 
So because you decided the governor, that's not that they don't decide.! 
So who decides well, there's based upon the governor's orders. 
The governor said that this is an honest. 
The governor said that we can conduct this meeting virtually or, you can but. 
So as long as you can conduct it, virtually meeting is considered to be non-essential because you have the ability to be able to connect the virtual reality.
, thanks thank you for that. 
It's, mr black, 
so 202.45 it was extended by 202.53 and it's in effect, until august 20th,, 
next fury good evening, I'm a proud sacrum educator and a parent of three daughters who attend sageman schools. 
I'm here tonight to voice my concerns regarding the secondary reentry plan. 
I have a daughter in eighth grade 
and I also have a senior. 
I have grave concerns regarding the lack of an equitable education for our secondary students. 
These children will suffer the ramifications of this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
In some instances, this decision may change the course of their adult lives. 
I don't want that to happen to my children 
and I don't want it to happen to anyone else's. 
I implore you to reconsider this plan and attempt to find a way to make the secondary re-entry plan more equitable, so that our chm students can receive 100 of the curriculum that they are entitled to just like our elementary students. 
Thank you. 
That's all 23 board discussions. 
The first one we put on today was an adoption of the 20 2021 calendar. 
There was a talk of a change. 
Mr o'keefe. 
It's just you know something I want to bring to the board's attention because obviously administration has been meeting with district administrators as well as our teachers looking at the opening of school and just trying to be sure that we can be as prepared as possible for whatever that is. 
Other districts have taken a look at this and also chosen that option each year a district is allowed up to four superintendents conference days. 
Our current calendar has three. 
The first two are in september the september second, and third days are superintendents conference days and the third one would be. 
On election day november. 
Third, we've been discussing the possibility of having the board consider the ninth, which is wednesday
, I'm sorry, eighth, which would be the the first day of school for students to be a third superintendent's conference day in september. 
That would give staff teachers administrators everything all the time that they need to be sure if there are those last minute, tweaks changes to classroom setups changes to schedules assignments. 
Whatever the case is, you know, I had a lengthy conversation with mr barbara last night. 
You know his guidance. 
Counselors are ready to dive in to do whatever work needs to be done to make our secondary experience as good as possible, but we need the data first. 
So once we have that data we can dive in on this, we don't have much time and time is not on our side. 
So for your consideration, we'd like to talk about adding the eighth as a superintendent's conference day. 
Would we have to remove another day off the calendar for that we would just convert that date to a super. 
I wouldn't alter the calendar right now other than that. 
Obviously, since the year hasn't even begun, it still keeps us within legal limits. 
It still leaves us the flexibility if we were to have a severe winter. 
You know, maybe with the new reality of our ability to switch between distance learning. 
Maybe that can even help us. 
You know in bad storms and things like that, where we might be able to turn something like that on and not lose instructional time, but I think giving the staff that extra time, especially since we're down to the wire you know, could be helpful now on the counter side. 
Obviously, families are already starting to make plans they're ready to send kids back on the 8th 
they've already made decisions they've arranged child care. 
Whatever the case is so it isn't just as simple as you deciding let's re-adopt a calendar, and maybe it's not even something you do tonight. 
Maybe it's something you consider you think about, and maybe it's on the next agenda for the 26th, but I wanted to bring it to your attention to give you some time to think about it and talk about it. 
you know. 
Is it a possibility where we could consider that day, for additional staff planning? 
Does anybody have a question about the calendar? 
I'm just thinking we're gonna make this decision. 
We have to make it tonight, so parents do have enough time to make arrangements. 
Mr bauman, can you what kind of professional development day would it look like? 
What would it look like?
, it would be a useful day for the teachers too. 
It's not a none. 
I mean miss heinz, can speak better to the professional development days. 
None of them are going to be like the normal professional development days. 
I'm sorry
, I didn't mean professional development superintendent's day. 
Would it be a day that the teachers would be able to kind of get their stuff together?
, we so I mean, as we've been saying, our teachers have been working hard all summer ongoing professional development. 
This is really more honored space for them, so they can continue to clean up. 
Get things ready, make sure the google classrooms all their lessons, are in place. 
So not our traditional. 
You know ad camp style superintendents conference days, but we recognize that it's a tremendous amount of work to get started. 
Does anybody have any other questions? 
Does anybody want to vote on it tonight or did you was the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready? 
It came through a conversation. 
You know, administration and staff have asked for it. 
So I agree with sarah the earlier the better I would agree as well. 
We can vote on it right now. 
All right motion to change the calendar to the eighth being a staff development day. 
Second, by miss volpe, all in favor opposed the calendar is done, get that information out to families as quickly as possible. 
The next item up for discussion is future board letter writing. 
This is something that I personally put on. 
I 
I don't think that we should be putting letters out to the community if, with all of our names on it, if we don't agree with what it says, and I could be in the minority on that- 
but I'm I would be fine with writing a letter, putting spaces underneath and letting those who agree. 
Do it now 
most times it's a nine, nothing 
and there's no issues 
but. 
You know I personally didn't agree with the letter that got put out and if my name is going to be on it especially admonishing another board member. 
I have to agree with it 
and that's just the way I personally feel about it. 
I understand that we're a body 
and I get that, 
but at the end of the day, it's our name 
and we have to put our head on our pillows 
and if we don't agree with something I want everyone to have the freedom to not only say that but be able to just to live with the decisions that are made and to be able to stand up to the community and say here. 
I did this or I did not do this and have a straight face when you say it, 
I 
I just 
I didn't agree and 
it's my fault for you know ever putting my name on that piece of paper. 
So I just I want to put it from here on out. 
If anyone has an issue, feel free, but if, whatever letter it is, we write the letter, our names are on the bottom and we can sign the letter if we agree with it. 
If we don't, we take the space away and then you don't have to sign it. 
If you don't want to, but at least you can, you can make your own decision and you don't have to feel like you're beholden, 
because maybe it's only five people who agree with it and five out of the nine agree and now, all of a sudden, it's a board decision and your name goes on it, no matter what jim so
, how do you determine whose name is going on suppose four people want the letter out is: is that sufficient to send the letter with four names? 
That's! 
That's why it's up for discussion, so I did it. 
So it's got to be a majority. 
Take to even have the letter go out, so five members have to support it and then, let's suppose it's a 5-4, the letter does go out board of education and the five members who agree with it sign it. 
That's 
I'm going to see that if anybody had an issue with that, I I just wanted to address it tonight so that we haven't had a chance to get all together in a room. 
So so let me express you on the opposite end of the spectrum. 
If four people want to put a letter out and it's a four or five board, the four people be able to put a letter out, because the way that, when you sign up for the board of education, you sign up as a group, and you vote as a group- 
and, listen, there are things that happened in the past. 
Why? 
I was on the no side of a vote where I got dragged to the mud, but I signed up for that. 
You know, so my my impression is that five is a majority and and it's what moves resolutions and it's what moves you know. 
You know different different incent, you know initiatives and so on and so forth. 
So so I think the easy way to do that is that when you're getting attacked by a community member, because of what the letter says, your response is look the board. 
The board majority voted on it. 
I don't necessarily agree with it. 
You know, if you have concerns, contact the rest of the board. 
You know 
and that's how we leave it. 
Just just my just my personal opinion this I happen to disagree 
only because when we pass, let's just say the new principle for sage of north in the in the minutes, it will reflect that jim voted.
, it's not going to vote that., we voted, but if you go look in the in the back to it, jim can say I 
I 
I said and 
he could say anybody to the community 
and here's why I voted and he could put his head on his polo 
and he's fine like it will not reflect that. 
I said and, and just, I think it's wrong- that you get dragged through the mud on stuff that you voted for, and you can't even back it up, because there is no record of you ever saying.
, unless you look through certain things on votes, but if it's a letter, there's no record of anybody saying, but if the letter's coming from the board of education is it coming from the board of education? 
Is it coming from five board members? 
I mean I, so I guess my point is: I don't think we should be writing any letter. 
That's admonishing another member 
I mean most most letters are in agreement to the state saying we need our funding to the state saying we don't agree with certain things that they're doing, but we should certainly not be or so and maybe, mr black, you can answer this. 
When we get elected to the board of education, my voice means nothing more than anybody sitting out there. 
My voice only means one as part of us nine. 
We 
I have no 
I can't decide anything. 
I have no more decision making than my neighbor next door. 
My my only input or influence comes as as a board of nine, so the letters that we had done previously, like supporting our seniors graduating in person or the denouncement of betty devos as the education or denouncing racism that was issued as a board, not as me as an individual. 
So I think legally, mr black, if you could just give us some guidance here that, when the board of education of sagem school district issues a letter, I think it has to come from the board. 
If laura slattery, who who lives in wisconsin, wants to send a letter to governor cuomo, then I signed my name: laura slattery, not laura slattery, ch, board of education, trustee and- 
and that's 
I feel that me on this board, I'm not a republican democrat independent anything. 
I am representing a community of 55 000 registered voters, my personal opinions or anything I feel 
personally does not matter when I'm sitting here with the nine nine of us. 
My only thing that I can do as a board trustee is in as a majority of this board. 
Unless, legally you see something, that's how I feel I was elected by the voters. 
I was elected by my sachim community. 
I 
I feel like I have to represent my sagem community as one of nine, not as laura slattery individual and, of course I don't think, that's being suggested, but we're a governing body and every governing body around the country operates that way. 
You operate as a body, you're elected to be part of this body. 
You make decisions as a as a body. 
There may be differences of opinion, that's part of our democracy. 
That's what makes our country great you'll, be able to express those opinions. 
At the end of the day, you have to make a collective decision, and then you have to abide by the decision that that body makes one possible solution. 
Is that? 
If you are going to issue a letter and there's concerns that dissenting members vote is not going to be known like it is? 
When we take a public vote, you can take a public vote to send the letter, and then you can adopt that letter as a majority vote. 
Those who dissent are on as a matter of record 
they're on 
they're on record
, if that's the case, so so you're saying that no one member is allowed to remove their name from a letter. 
I would say that that's not typical practice that you would see, but is it legal for a member to remove a name?, if the, when your letter is going out, I don't think it typically sets forth all the names. 
I don't know. 
I don't really like to say it. 
Has it printed all your names on the left side, it says, there's a list of all the names and on the bottom
, it's the president's name. 
So, on the left side of the letter it has all of our names listed. 
But that's your that's! 
Your letterhead lists all your names. 
It doesn't indicate whether or not you voted for that letter to go out or not. 
It's you're represented on that letterhead. 
It's an official board of education stationery! 
That's why your name is on there. 
It's not signaling that you voted for that or not, but the recognition is, though, that when you do take a vote or when the board puts out material that that's so 
so that's a fine
, that's a compromised decision. 
I think that any and all letters should be discussed in public and voted in our public. 
That is a concern that you have that's one way of addressing it. 
I I was just going. 
I was just going to say that that sounds like an excellent idea and that really just goes back to 
you said about my vote. 
You know is on record and your eight votes are on record for these fine individuals here. 
So that would be the same thing. 
We discuss a letter. 
You know we take a vote on it.
, if it's a majority vote, the letter will go, but the dissenters are also in the minutes. 
I like it 
and I'm 100 in agreement with that. 
This way, it's a public discussion. 
Anybody can look back, but then we still are issuing a letter based on a majority of the board, but as long as there's a record of who votes and who votes?
, I'm correct. 
I am 100 fine with that. 
Just one statement and me and laura have gone round and round about this before, but I want to. 
I want to make this point. 
Look we're all elected members to this board as any elected official is. 
If I want to write a letter- 
and I want to sign my letter bill, cogan board trustee sachem, I'm 100 within my rights- to do that. 
It's a matter of opinion as to whether or not I should do that 
if I want to get together with four other board members and each one of us want to sign it as board trustees. 
Once again, we are within our rights to do that. 
All right. 
It may be perceived as a bad idea by this board, but there's nothing illegal about it.
, inside it's not a vote. 
I don't think we're going to take here. 
I just I just wanted to make sure that we discussed it and there was at least a public so that all future letter writing is done in public and just also just to add to it. 
It's been customary that at the bottom of the letter, the signature block states, the president's name on behalf of just signed the letter sincerely the sachin board of education and not place the president's name on the bottom of the letter.
,, the last item up for discussion is the diversity task force. 
So, as you guys know, I gave you guys all an outline about what just got a little bit closer.
, I gave you all the an outline, probably in the end of july, and I don't know if you all got a chance to look it over. 
I shared it with the board again the other day. 
Sarah. 
So I would just like to make a motion to put it on to vote tonight on establishing this task force. 
I mean my my only issue is, and I don't have a problem with this diversity task force, but the way community committees are usually done is that we could vote to establish one give direction to administration to come back as to what the charge is going to be talk about the charge and then approve it. 
I 
I 
I would say that that's that's, probably the route we should go and in the years that have been on the board
, we establish construction capital projects, committees and you know some are established for one specific job 
and then they 
they they disappear, and that was for one of the. 
You know construction projects that we did after that 
we didn't do any for a while. 
So we didn't need that organization, but I would say that we we either vote on it tonight.
, we want to pursue something like this. 
We understand what the end game is, what we're trying to achieve and then normally what happened is administration would put together a packet of a pamphlet, that's made available to the community. 
They could download it in a pdf format. 
People would sign up for it submit in the same way they would for a budget advisory committee. 
You know or so 
or you know any other thing, so I would just say that we we follow that format. 
You know and- 
and you know, we're not adopting exactly what the world 
but we're establishing a diversity, task force and and charging administration to come back to us with what the charge is going to be. 
I would have no problem with that. 
Any questions everyone all in favor of 
I'm sorry, yep. 
I read the whole thing like lots of times. 
I think it's great, you know we need it here in saturn, all in favor, all right any opposed. 
Mr picariello, this still one visitor that we had called wasn't here at the time. 
miss williamson. 
Thank you, miss williamson, I'm sorry! 
I know that it's late, I apologize. 
I was doing yard work 
and I was listening. 
Thank you and I had to come 
so I apologize. 
This is my first time doing anything like this, so I really don't have anything written out or able to look up anything outside. 
So I'll tell you about myself. 
I have four children, three at hiawatha, two of them with severe nut allergies and one of them with viral induced asthma. 
I didn't, I don't really know.
, let me just go with this. 
My kids are fine, they will be homeschooled and they will be homeschooled.. 
What about all the other children that aren't as lucky as my kids? 
How come? 
Nobody is talking about them? 
How come what nobody's talking about the children getting hit at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't eating at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't learning or being sexually abused at home? 
Nobody cares about those kids. 
I hear a lot of things, how we're emptying the rooms and there's going to be nothing in there? 
No one's allowed to touch each other, no one's allowed near each other. 
We're not we're teaching our kids to be scared. 
I was scared for a long time. 
I've been hurt. 
I've been scared of allergies and a nut killing. 
My child fear cannot run us. 
We need to stand up for who we are and what we believe in 
and I believe all our children deserve a fair chance at life 
and we are not giving it to them. 
I think I think that's it. 
Thank you very much. 
I know that you waited a while. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Letter c is board of ed discussion. 
Future agenda items future discussion. 
Items excuse me: does anyone have anything future to talk about covered three tonight? 
We, the next meeting. 
I don't know if that's the right date. 
That's today.
, the 26th is august. 
26Th
, we're hoping to still be here at 7, 30 p.m. 
Can I have a motion to move into executive session 
now we need a reason. 
Mr block, we're discussing we're discussing property,, property. 
I'm sorry! 
I just lost me. 
First real estate transaction, real estate transaction. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins say goodbye, mr bauman. 
All in favor meeting is good. 
Thank you very much. 
Everyone good night be careful. 
Going home,.
Thank you very much. 
is [Music], read the congratulations, so,,, visitors!
, everyone rise for the pledge and then remain standing for a moment of silence with liberty and justice for all. 
Thank you [Music] good evening. 
Everyone, as you can see, the board of education is attempting to return to some form of public meeting, which is also compliant within the limits set forth by the governor's executive orders and the guidelines of the cdc and department of health. 
We must limit the number of people permitted to be physically present as a part of our compliance with those obligations. 
Perhaps the most important item for our meeting tonight is a public discussion about the reopening plan for september, as it pertains to the plan. 
We hope to have answers to most of your questions as part of the presentation, but may also need time for the administration to research, an issue on occasion. 
You can always email the superintendent with the question as well. 
I am also aware that some attendees may wish to speak about matters related to conversations that occurred on social media and the role of the board of education. 
In that regard, if you wish to speak, be sure to fill out a card and give it to the district clerk. 
There will be two opportunities for public to speak at this meeting. 
The first is limited to comments relating to agenda items only. 
We will then move through the agenda after we complete the agenda items. 
A second opportunity for public comment about non-agenda items will be provided. 
I ask that all present be reminded to be respectful of one another. 
The administration and the board. 
Also the opportunity for public comment is just that public comment. 
The board of education will not engage in debate or back and forth with the public during the period of public comment in an attempt to provide all who wish to speak an opportunity to do so. 
Our policy limits comments to three minutes. 
There may be people who wish to speak, who have been left outside due to space limitations. 
ask security station at the doors for a card and they will bring it in to the clerk again. 
While we respect the community and we always want to provide people with the opportunity to be heard if things devolve into personal insult or invective as the president, I will entertain a motion to adjourn the meeting. 
I thank you all in advance for your cooperation to start tonight's meeting. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe are going to make a presentation about our reentry plan. 
Sure miss florio. 
Could you fire up the cameras for us 
all right just give us a moment. 
While we wait for that and while we're doing that, I'd also like to apologize to those from watching from home, because, unfortunately, obviously from that distance you're not really going to be able to see our screen. 
So for that we're very sorry. 
You know, unfortunately, the limitations of how many people are in the room you know have we been able to move it to an auditorium. 
We certainly would have done that, but we're limited to a total of 50 people or 50 of a room's capacity. 
Whichever number is lower, so, unfortunately we're at that 50 capacity in this room this evening. 
This document, we're going to show tonight again is another evolving document. 
Back on the 31st, we placed the district's plan on the website, as required by state law. 
That plan had to talk about three different models for return, which it did since the plan was posted on the website. 
You may have seen additional commentary from our governor where he has since changed some of the parameters, such as offering additional opportunities for choice for family and or for staff. 
So we need to take those things into consideration. 
So again, this document and the presentation you're going to see this evening is the most accurate as of now, but it by far is not completed at the conclusion of tonight's meeting in this presentation, you're going to get a copy of this presentation emailed to you through the school messenger system, it'll also be up on social media and it'll, be up on our website, you're, also going to receive an invitation to participate in a survey regarding choice. 
It's a follow-up to the survey that we sent out last week, where we asked potential preferences, this one's going to need to be more definitive where we actually need to know which families are looking to have their children receive instruction at home versus those that are willing to send children to school. 
So without further ado, I'm going to ask miss heinz to start us off. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe. 
So this morning we actually concluded and had our last committee meeting, which culminated in the plan that we're going to be sharing with you tonight and, as mr o'keefe said, all of the community members will be receiving at eight o'clock a phone call to this manner and also the plan and the survey for remote learning. 
I just want to thank all of the folks that were on that committee with us. 
We are made up of several community members unit leaders, staff of all sorts, and it really has been a pleasure to work with everybody. 
Excuse me one second, while I got this on, so after a tremendous amount of feedback that we received from our survey from our community and given the lengthy documents that we have given out and the models over the past few months, I can happily say that we are able to offer a full return for our elementary students k-5, as well as a full return for our students with disabilities, our special class, which would be our 15-1 classes, our 12-1 classes and our 8-1 students, and at the secondary level due to size and the fact that, because we will need to reappropriate space at both levels, elementary and secondary, we will have to move forward with a hybrid model for grades six to twelve, and that will be an a b schedule based on alpha and household. 
The reason why we were able to offer a full return for our elementary school is because mr o'keefe and myself and our instructional directors and our director for facilities and the building principal began walk-throughs. 
Last week. 
We walked through each and every room in our buildings to space and measure at six feet. 
On the average we are able to fit about 17 students in a class. 
Now again, know that we have scheduled a full return with our total population, so with any remote instruction that would diminish the amount of students coming into our schools, so we would actually have even more room because of the re appropriation of space we needed about one extra section or one extra grade level k5 at each building generally, so we are going to be utilizing space in our libraries in our arts and our music rooms and other common areas, which we'll talk about a little bit later on remote learning is something that, as you know, last week, it was confirmed that we will, as districts need to be offering this to our students as well. 
This will be a parent choice and a consent tonight at eight o'clock. 
Again, when you receive that plan, there will be a survey in there 
and we ask that only parents who are looking to remotely instruct their child fill out the survey, and it is due. 
It is a fast turnaround by friday. 
We need to be able to staff and schedule the remaining students that we have coming into our schools, remote learning again, 
that is by a parent's choice with consent and at this time it is a decision for the entirety of the 2021 school year. 
I say this now because, based on the number of possible staff who may also look for accommodations, that might mean staff members staying home in conjunction with our students, we need to match up to see if we have enough staff members who are going to be able to offer remote instruction or should we have to look towards live streaming. 
If we do not have enough certificated staff that matches up with the number of students, and so therefore we would not have possibly a physical space for students to come back to. 
If that were the case, should, of course, all restrictions be lifted through the governor's office, then we would have to, and hopefully would have a little bit of time in between. 
We would just have to restructure and reschedule to ensure that all students are able to return remote instruction will entail. 
It is not like being in person school and it is not distance. 
Learning. 
Distance learning is only going to be offered. 
If, again, we are ordered by the governor's office to remain at home. 
All students and all staff remain at home, and that would be live instruction for two and a half hours on google me that would be k12. 
Remote learning is different. 
This is, more asynchronous learning with possible, live or streaming teaching happening throughout the day. 
This would also be a schedule that would look a tad different based again on the number of students and how we would need to support everybody, but we just did want to be. 
You know fully upfront and present about that. 
We also know that devices for us 
we are not a one-to-one school district. 
We have definitely made some strides and we are in the middle of major infrastructure work that is going on. 
We just did order about a thousand new chromebooks in order to be able to disperse for families that do not have any technology in their home at all, but it would be difficult for us to provide a device for every student in their home 
should they be on remote learning. 
So that would be something that the family would also have to consider. 
Students will be expected to complete all assignments daily and any students, obviously with disabilities on remote learning, would be provided all of their accommodations as per iep. 
As for their iep okay, it's important
, I'm sorry, it's important to just also talk about the secondary hybrid model for six to twelve. 
On your a day, let's just say, you know, for the sake of just explaining it to everybody, it would be a combination on on a day. 
You would be in your child would run their traditional regular schedule. 
They would leave with homework and any work that would be on their google classroom for the next day that they are home, while the teacher is then teaching the other second half of the class on b. 
Obviously, our teachers are committed folks and they would be checking in answering any questions within that 24-hour period, but we would expect that at the secondary level, again, kids will be making sure that all of their assignments are completed and they are, and they are present. 
Attendance is important as we move forward in this school year.
, now that we shared with you a model of how we're looking to return our students, I think it's very important that all families and community members now our staff knows about the health and safety measures that we are putting in place, and we continue to look to put more in place as as time goes on, masks will be required for all staff and students, both in school and on the bus. 
Remember that the bus is an extension of school, any students are having any difficulty wearing a mask for medical reasons or because of a disability will need to submit documentation. 
As always, they would affirm this with their building principle or through the office of student services. 
Mass breaks will be provided because remember in our classrooms. 
Our desks are six feet apart and in the regulations. 
Children do not have to wear a mask during instruction. 
We would encourage, of course, that masks be worn at all times, but that does give us the opportunity to give multiple mass breaks whenever a child does need it, while they're being instructed masks are to be worn, though, however, in the hallways cafeterias, if they're not eating recess any other common area that we would just want to be safe,, we also every day. 
I'm, excuse me. 
bus travel will also include, as I said, before, social distancing practices optimally. 
We will be looking for six feet spacing and encouraging family members to sit together. 
Every day, parents and staff will be expected to fill out an online health screening survey and in this presentation, when you do receive it, you will see a hyperlink in there that you can see a sample of what it looks like ahead of time. 
We are also. 
We also took time to ensure that at arrival and dismissal, varied entrances in all of our buildings will be sanctioned off to separate grade levels. 
If they come off of the bus, we are also looking to take off the grade levels at increments of time off the bus. 
So everybody is not coming out at the same time so again, just looking to work ways to have plenty of flow while classmans may not look typical, especially at the younger levels. 
You may not see some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see. 
know that our classrooms will be warm and inviting like they always are, because their teachers will be there. 
Their principals will be there and we will still be able to decorate it. 
We will just not be able to decorate it with things that kids will be touching, because it would need to be sanitized every day. 
All classrooms will be devoid, as I said before, of any of those items that may collect germs. 
We are in the process right now, of setting up opportunities for our teachers to continue to clean out their their own personal items, and we are also moving out any unwanted furniture that we don't need in the room so that we can maximize 
the space hallways and other common spaces are being marked appropriately to ensure social, distancing, so markings on the floor items around on the walls and that's also shared later on in our presentation. 
So you will be able to see it at home as well. 
When you open up the link hand, sanitizer stations are located throughout each building, all along the hallways. 
We will also be having them at the elementary level or any other area for gym cafeteria time when, at the secondary level, they're able to go out so 
as children go in and out, they can use a hand sanitizer as they come into school. 
All of those. 
You know, welcoming areas would have a hand sanitizer station as well and at the elementary level. 
We would expect that the students, because we do have sinks in every room they would be washing their hands before and after snack and before and after lunch., so continued on. 
As I said earlier, we have reappropriated spaces at the elementary level and we are in the process of doing the same walkthroughs. 
Now in the secondary buildings. 
We know it's going to be very difficult, especially for the cafeterias to be utilized the way that they typically are, because children cannot sit in those tables together. 
So moving in some desks, looking at classroom use all of those different types of things, but really at the elementary level. 
We will be using again if we're going on full return for all students. 
Right now in elementary school, we would be looking to utilize our music space, our art space, and so therefore, those special areas become pushing for our students. 
We have worked with those departments and we'll continue to work to make sure that they have everything that they need for their lessons and equipment. 
Cleaning of all buildings will occur daily in the evenings in each classroom. 
We will also provide hand, sanitizer, wipes, gloves and any sort of spray bottles and wipe offs for for our staff and or students who feel encouraged to clean in between applicable filters have also been changed in our classroom events. 
We will also look to open up our windows and our doors where we can. 
Obviously you know the reverse was safety making sure that your doors were always locked. 
Your windows were always closed. 
Now, we're being encouraged by the department of health to please use fresh air when possible. 
So we will look to do that prior to it becoming too chilly up. 
Isolation areas have been identified in our buildings, and so, if a child is it has any sort of of symptoms or they come to school 
and they have not filled out the health screening. 
Those students would be placed there so that we can offer a temperature check and make sure that everything looks okay before we send them down to their classroom hygiene protocol visuals will exist in all buildings if they're not there. 
Already and again I share those with you at the end of our presentation so that you can see them. 
We will also be having routine hygiene drills much in the same of how we have regular school building drills at this time. 
Unfortunately, no visitors will be permitted in our schools. 
We just cannot provide enough secure measures for our staff and our students, and so again we will be limiting all visitors. 
Both traditional fire and hygiene. 
Drills will be conducted elementary snack and lunch will be in the classroom to minimize flow and secondary lunch. 
It may be in the cafeteria and alternately in the classrooms. 
We will also rotate any outdoor areas so for recess any of those other matters classes will be rotated on the game field, the basketball court, let's say, for example, and in our playgrounds students, are encouraged to bring their own water bottles. 
We do have bottle filling stations in all of our buildings. 
Our water fountains, unfortunately, will have to be closed at this time.
, so just some additional elementary return details that we wanted to share with you. 
You know it's always tough to start with health and safety, because again we don't want it to sound, like our students are returning to jail, but we do want to make sure that our students and our staff feel safe for the return. 
But know that, on top of everything that we are doing, the social emotional well-being of our students is of the utmost importance to us, as well as of our staff, and we have surveyed students and we are looking to survey further the rest of our staff to just find out what are some of those underlying issues or concerns that people have. 
So we can ensure that we have our mental health staff there for supports. 
Unfortunately, we we will have to stress that students may not share materials. 
At this time, students will be assigned their own independent, math, workbooks and guided reading baggies will be provided weekly so that we have time to interchange them out clean them up and leave them for the weekend, so that there's a two to three day lag before the children pick up a new baggie and in those items we will integrate. 
As always in our literacy and our math, our science and social studies, topics whenever possible, this will be in addition to the strong direct instruction that our classroom teachers provide. 
Already all all students will be benchmarked for their ela and their math to identify their present learning levels. 
Curriculum will be retard as needed. 
We definitely know that this will need to occur for math, and we have provided some slides in the past that show you that we're fortunate we created our own math curriculum here 
a couple of years back 
and we know the the one to two units that each grade level will probably need to go back to so that, if I'm coming into second grade, I'm certainly not going to be able to start on my second grade. 
Math curriculum 
I'll need to be re-taught, some of the materials from when I was in first grade and for literacy. 
Once the teacher knows the collective levels of what they have in their room, they will be able to accommodate those literacy. 
Lessons around that art and music will be a push in again to minimize the flow, and we are currently working with our art, music departments. 
This is one that was a really tough hit. 
Music has to be 12 feet. 
Apart for any coral or any sort of wind instruments, we are working our hardest with that department. 
We are very fortunate here. 
We have a very strong music program and we do not want to see that diminish, 
and so we are looking for ways to think out of the box in order to be able to offer course opportunities that might be in smaller sections and different ways to offer lessons as well, but we have provided and are keeping all lesson areas in the elementary schools, so that students can still maintain lessons as needed. 
Physical education will be a mix of separating two classes. 
Typically, that are adjoined, so one class will be in the gym. 
One class will be outside and inclement weather they will rotate between the gym and in the classroom.
, mr butel and miss mcentee have reworked their curriculum to ensure that all team sports will be done in the spring, so all of those units will be taught in the spring and in the beginning it will be more personal. 
Fitness. 
Traditional grading will also return for our students. 
While we know that there may be some interruption in terms of what model our students may have to face, where we hear rumors that we may have to go to distance learning sometime later in the fall. 
We fully believe that by using google classroom no matter what we will be able to make that seamless transition to distance learning should we need- 
and we are well prepared, as opposed to when the crisis first happened, and most school districts were really just grasping at straws, 
but we also know that the accountability is something that is very important to our students very important to our community and especially to our students who are at the high school level. 
As I said before, google classroom will be utilized for communication at both the building principle and classroom teacher level. 
We really want to make sure that parents are on one medium so that they can see any communication, email messages, lessons etc, and at this time we are going to enforce, to ensure for the safety of our staff and other students that any sort of instruction that is done on google classroom or virtually that our students adhere to our district code of conduct. 
When students this year sign on families sign on to look at schedules, they will be asked and prompted to sign off on certain measures around this. 
I just wanted to share with you some of our pictures that john 
and I took as we went around in our walkthroughs. 
These are some samples of our our elementary classrooms. 
Again, they're, not decorated, yet, of course, but you can see that we have removed a lot of the traditional. 
You know, wonderful items that we would see in a classroom, but again we really wanted to maximize space and ensure that the teacher had space in the front of where their smart boards are and then also making sure that kids had room and were not. 
You know pushed up too too much, so we still are adjusting that once every single classroom is created at the building level, we will be returning mr o'keefe and I, with our team, to just ensure that everybody has space both the teacher in the front of the room and then students around. 
So again, we are fortunate here. 
We do believe that we have enough staff to move forward and should the numbers for remote learning ensure even more flexibility. 
We may be able to open up more sections in our elementary schools and at our secondary levels, bringing back more secondary students. 
This is at one more of the elementary school and to the right there. 
You will see a classroom at the secondary level.. 
This particular sample is where we marked it the a and b desks, so that students will be sitting 
and then it will make it a little bit easier for cleaning at night for our custodial staff.. 
This is this is also a little bit of a tough share here, because I know that we've been getting a lot of questions about child care and upk. 
First, child care: we are still going to be providing am npm child care by boce by scope, educational services. 
They continue to offer right now child care throughout the pandemic for our essential workers, and they are happy to move forward to offer this services for all of our students. 
At this point, though, we are on hold for our upk program, and that is not because we don't have the space or 
we don't want to, but we simply have not received the allocations yet from the state, and that is how we are able to run our our upk program. 
While we do have many students who do a tuition based into the program, it is simply not enough to substantiate the program. 
Should we not get the allocations, so we are advising parents at this time. 
I know I've. 
I've answered many phone calls many emails if you are need, if you need care, if you would like your child to go to an alternate preschool now is the time to seek that out just to be safe. 
However, if we were to find out about the allocations tomorrow, we would also be able to implement that. 
You know moving forward, so we have not changed anything we're not changing any spaces at this time, we're just kind of on a standstill but to be safe. 
We just encourage you to look just in case. 
Excuse me, ms hines, yes. 
Actually, since we last spoke earlier today, I spoke to mr duffy, he's the executive director of scope and runs our upk program just trying to see if he's heard anything further about the program and he has not heard much more than we have. 
As a matter of fact, there was a meeting earlier in the day with the suffolk county, superintendents, as well as mr wix who's, the regional superintendent for eastern suffolk boces, to see what boces knew about upk funding and again their contacts in albany have been very, very quiet on it. 
The only information they've received is, you know, floating a balloon from albany that they're considering opening upk up, but they may only fund it at 80 percent of what the grant would be. 
So that would mean if the district wanted to move forward. 
That would be an expense that was not budgeted for and we'd have to make a determination. 
You know to take those monies from elsewhere to support the program, so it sounds like they're getting closer to a final decision, but I'd have to keep the border prize, so it might be a model in which we'd have to support 20 of the program to make it move forward. 
So I'll keep you posted on that. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe,, and then on to now our boces cte program. 
So those are our students because we do have two. 
We have cte programs that we house ourselves. 
They will still remain on the a b schedule, but the but the bose cte programs, where students get on the bus and go to boces. 
Boces did alert us last week that they will be providing that in house they do have the room 
so that will be live every day and for those students 
we will still have busing from our high schools to and from the program. 
We at this time, though, say that we may need family support in terms of if your child might need a ride to school if they are going to the program in the afternoon or alternately. 
That is, that is not solidified. 
Mr o'keefe and mr savone are looking at that through transportation to see if we might be able to accommodate and pick up individual students at their homes. 
That would only be for those choosing remote learning right. 
Only those choosing remotely. 
Thank you,,. 
So here I just. 
I share the hyperlinks that you will see on on the presentation that that we've sent home for the sake of time, I'm not going to go through all of these links, but the top is a sample of our health screening form and the bottom of our all the protocol visuals a sample of them that we have smattered around every single building and so for our next steps. 
As we said this morning, we finished our planning committee meeting where we laid out the the final steps here with our district leaders and our volunteers. 
Our board of education, pres presentation is, is now as you can see, and then we also have a live community forum on monday at seven o'clock and we will be live streaming it. 
Similarly here, however, I would envision that we would be a little closer that so that you can see us a little bit more clear, but on friday we will be sending out a survey just asking community members for questions that they have. 
We will collate those into subject areas and we will look to our best answer. 
Any questions that you have as well as our building administration will be delivering a common q, a sort of like fact sheet about further details pertaining to to the buildings, and this will include sample schedules for all of our students- orientations how those will go out for our grade six on our grade nine. 
Some of that will be virtual and some of that will still be activities just broken up into smaller increments at the building, as well as arrival and dismissal times and bell schedules for secondary students and then, lastly, as governor cuomo had ordered on friday, we are in the process of updating our district website for protocols for any symptomatic individuals testing. 
We are not responsible per se for testing ourselves, but we are responsible for offering a plan. 
Should a student or a staff member go home, they are required to go, get testing where that could occur, and then, of course, they can't come back into school until testing results have been provided and then contact tracing as well.. 
So that is the end of our presentation this evening. 
We look forward to speaking and sharing some more and clarifying more for you, as the rest of the night goes on and then on monday, as well at seven o'clock. 
Did I my apologies. 
Let me go back. 
I 
I didn't realize that I think I got caught up in what we were saying about upk before, so my apologies. 
These are some additional details about our secondary return and again, with the utmost priority being the social and emotional well-being of our students. 
In grades. 
Six to eight we will be benchmarking for eli. 
We do that through a literacy management system that we have and also for math. 
All of our math departments have benchmarking type assessments that they do in the beginning of the year and again this will be to identify present learning levels in grades, seven to 12 curriculum adjustments may be made for applicable areas where prior learning needs to be had so, for example, in our math and our science classes, there may need to be some learning from the prior year's regents bearing class, and so we would be looking to look at curriculum around that and possibly offer review classes for our students as well again, traditional grading will return. 
Students may not share, so we will be limiting textbook use 
and we'll be taking advantage of all of the online subscriptions that we have physical education again. 
Very much like elementary school will be a mix of the gym outside fields and other large area 
use instrumental lessons very similar to elementary. 
We are working with that department to ensure that lessons will occur. 
They do need to be 12 feet if they are wind and or choral in nature, and again we will be looking to figure out ways in order to still offer those choral groups, but in a modified version google classroom will continue to be utilized for communication with both the principal and the classroom teacher again for a seamless transition should we ever be ordered into distance learning. 
Lockers will mostly be used for am and pickup 
only that's not to say that if a student really needed to go back, we would not allow them to, but again just trying to minimize the flow and minimize how much our students are putting into the lockers. 
So we would envision some form of outerwear
, that's appropriate for that time and modified or or very. 
You know slight binders and or folders notebooks that they need stagger grades again in times of at the end of the period. 
We would be announcing grades so that they can come out into the hallways, so that would mean that we would be at the end of the period starting it a little bit earlier, so that we can allow each grade level to disperse into the hallway to their next period.
, sorry about that. 
So that still is the end of our presentation. 
We hope that this did clarify some further information for you. 
We are appreciative of the support and the time that the community offered us to be able to digest everything and wait for the orders, so we can bring this to you tonight. 
Thank you. 
Questions from the board questions from the board. 
Is anybody, jim, a john on the upk right now? 
The way that's funded is. 
Correct me. 
If I'm wrong, like a six hundred thousand dollar grant, primarily we get a six hundred thousand dollar grant. 
We hold a lottery that allots 252 families a spot in the program we have more interest than that annually, but families beyond the 253 are able to participate for the same rate, which is about twenty four hundred dollars per family for the year. 
So if, if the governor would give us 80 percent of that, that would mean that the district would have to come up with a hundred and twenty thousand dollars correct. 
But are you in that hundred twenty thousand dollars? 
Are we counting that that the lottery people are not paying tuition? 
That would still be the lottery people not paying right, so, in other words, the 120 000 could be reduced if the lottery people were willing to pay a tuition fee.
, that was a model the board chose to go with.
,, thank you just to figure back on what security was saying if they were to to to. 
Take twenty percent of that we'd be looking at about 479 thousand. 
Two hundred is what we'll be looking at, which is what accommodate 201 kids. 
You were saying that you were concerned that we, we might not be able to raise the funds to be able to. 
You know, manage the program and have enough you know what I mean. 
You'd have to redo the lottery. 
Then I I wouldn't I don't know. 
If would necessity, would you want to use the same number then cut it off?
, I set off at just 201 
and then and then open it up at 237.69 per per family per month. 
We could examine any model that the board wanted to take a look at. 
Certainly those other families had already been notified that they were among the families chosen for the free program. 
That's the worst. 
The worst case scenario would be correct, but let's say they take all the funding and, and they don't and one of the concerns to have it 
I mean have we thought about reaching out to some of our state elected officials, flanagan or doug smith, to find out if they can get us clarification from the governor's office as to whether or not he's going to fight, we can certainly continue to reach out. 
Quite honestly, during much of this crisis, much of them have been rather silent. 
We haven't been able to get a lot of information. 
The governor isn't sharing much with other people other than when he decides to put it out via press conference, I mean. 
Normally, our local representatives are very helpful in getting information for us. 
Unfortunately, hadn't been able to get information for us, but it's certainly worth trying. 
I mean we're two weeks before the start of school 
and you've got 252 families, not knowing whether or not they have a pre-k. 
I mean I don't know, you know how the board feels, but 
I personally think that you would get 252 families, even if they took all 599 000, because at 237 a month for half day pre-k, it's still a great great opportunity sure- 
and I can't and now more than ever and and would be willing to work with us if there was zero funding 
and we had enough participation to still run the program. 
would can we include something like that in the survey sits some of the families out there to see what the interests would be. 
We could do a separate survey. 
I wouldn't want to you know not on the same survey. 
put it out as a separate survey, specifically targeted to those families that are already in the process. 
I have a follow-up to that. 
Where are we putting all these students if our classes are maxed out at this time we still have not reappropriated those classes. 
We do have a couple of buildings because of additional special education sections that we needed, that we moved the classes, but we have not taken away those class spaces. 
Yet so, if we were to go with the will of the board to you know, put out a survey and go with a tuition base, we would be you know all set to go: hi. 
I just had a quick question about the bus and what is the busing going to look like I mean again
, it'll also depend on participation. 
You know we put out a survey to the parents a week or so ago. 
I think we had nine thousand respondents in in very brief order. 
in that survey about a third of the families considered, possibly keeping their children home of the two-thirds willing to send their children in 65 of those said they would use the bus. 
The other 35 said they would drive their children to school. 
So just some quick, math you're only looking at say, 4 500, kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers. 
I mean they could change when we put out the new survey, and it could be that you know parents first stop that they don't want to use the bus and then during the year. 
Maybe they start. 
You know they need the bus. 
So we're not reducing the number of bus runs. 
All the runs that have been budgeted for would be running, but with those numbers you'd end up literally with just about one child per seat. 
You know so 
and then you also take into account 
remote you'll get routed for 44 students. 
So in the worst case scenario there could be two pupils in each seat, but based on the information we're receiving, I don't think there'll be that participation.
, just some clarification so with the custodial staff cleaning each night, so 
they're going to have more to do than they did prior. 
Have we increased the custodial staff since their job description will be different to do a more deeper cleaning every day daily versus. 
Unfortunately, that was one of the items that was pulled back on the budget, so obviously we may need to take a look at that again we were rating 10 custodians and then, when there was issues where we even today, we still don't know what our state funding is 
and we still have the potential of a looming. 
20 percent cut, we decided. 
If you remember back to january and february, we were talking about this. 
We were adding one extra custodian, each building right. 
That was one of our enhancements for this year's budget. 
We did draw that back, so we're going to work with the staff. 
We have work with the substitute staff we have, and you know it as best as possible to optimize cleaning, and then with the secondary schools, where you have the a b desks next to each other. 
So that means, if I am an a student and I sit in only the a 
and then the next day, the b desk comes in. 
That image might change, though I was going to say that that was really more so that we can show a visual to the families, how we were spacing it out in the beginning, 
those desks we would see needing to be reappropriated and put into our our lunchrooms different other areas where we're going to need to reappropriate other space, the library different items like that. 
So I don't. 
I don't necessarily think we were just at north today and in the classrooms that we walked around in with miss trombetta. 
There was only about 15 to 16 desks in in each classroom: 
okay. 
That was an initial setup when we were trying to figure out what it would look like or how we could divide them up. 
But in fact, with the style of cafeteria tables, we have it. 
It really prohibits the number of children that can eat in the cafeteria. 
We believe we're going to take all the cafeteria tables out of those secondary cafeterias and store them and put in desks. 
I mean it's not going to be the most attractive. 
Lunchroom it'll be set up more like a testing room where children will be spaced six feet apart right with classroom desks correct, but we do anticipate that we would be able to offer breaks, for you know, students to be able to go outside and go into any of the recreation areas, 
items like that elimination and so then in the secondary schools. 
If the kids are changing classrooms will the desk get wiped down between each change or how does that work in the cafeteria?,,, not in the classrooms that would that would technically be not possible. 
I mean there's 3 000 desks in high school and 1600 or so in in a middle school. 
That just wouldn't be the means in that four or five minutes of passing to wipe down those tables. 
But if we student would want to do their own destiny, the materials will be in the classroom right. 
We are providing that for every classroom. 
and then one last question., everybody! 
It's okay! 
If a staff or a student happens to test positive, that would then be reported, and then the cdc would guide us on what we had to do or we have our own plan. 
How does that work? 
The department of health, the department of health department of health? 
So they would tell us so if it's one student in one classroom 
right that may be different than a student in a middle school who passes through a hall or mrs clayton's, become an expert on the matter.
, so the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require us to make reports for certain things and they require the medical treatment provider. 
The doctor who's performed the diagnosis for a positive result to report information to reporting for contact tracing. 
So therefore, our obligation we go above and beyond to make sure that, even if, for some reason, the medical treatment provider has not contacted the contact tracing, we will just check you know belt and suspenders that we have provided some insight in case 
there's an instance. 
The other thing is when the lab results come back. 
The lab results are supposed to be also provided to the contact tracing, at which point the department of health would be or enter cdc would be contacting tracers and determining who they would contact, including students or staff or family or whoever they came into contact with. 
Can I can I pick you back on that question quick?, thank you very much so on the checklist that we do daily. 
Let's just say rob 
and I are in a classroom 
and I find out that he test positive for covid the next day when my parents are filling out the check sheet and it says, have you come in contact with anybody? 
That's tested positive? 
Will that prevent my entrance into the building? 
If you're saying you tested positive, if you're saying you're tested right?
, I mean, I'm, not gonna, tell you that rob testifies we're not allowed to tell you 
I mean I came to learn it. 
It becomes common knowledge of who it was, and now I have to honestly fill out the sheet 
I mean I'm have to now have to say.
, I did come into contact with some of the department of health guidelines for close contact, and this is where it gets a little squirrelly because you know, are we in close contact? 
Are we in close contact? 
Their criteria for close contact is less than six feet for 15 minutes or more, so we'll have to look at each of those one at a time, and I can foresee the department of health as soon as schools open, you know, becoming overwhelmed with calls from districts all around the state just trying to get feedback and answers, so we're building criteria and protocols with our nursing staff with our personnel staff. 
You know, so we can make some of these decisions on our own. 
We have handled situations already, even during summer school programs. 
So it's not that we're unfamiliar with how to do it. 
We've had staff members with with covid, so it's just going to be on a bigger scale. 
Now, that's all, and also just to mention, mr block is with us this evening from ingram and smith. 
He has been our one of our main contacts that we've been triaging information between the state, the federal, what we have in our schools, what we can do and what we can't do and trying to find the best scenario for our students and our staff 
and we'll continue to do so, and I promise this is my last question. 
So if a parent chooses the remote learning,, they have to commit to that for the year. 
They can't change their mind like after the first marking period, they're committing to that 
and then their student cannot participate in, let's say spring sports,, so, I think in in the beginning of the guidance, it said that students may not be able to may not be able to enter into activities or sports. 
We know now that that is not the case and that if a child is remote, they're still a student of ours, we're not really going to have any activities. 
So we don't foresee that being an issue. 
So it's really more for sports, but miss trombetta who sits on. 
The community. 
Four section has shared with us information in terms of how they're looking at that language and how we would not be prohibited most likely from keeping children back from sports in september, and then the child plays a spring sport and then come the spring. 
Sports are up and running and you tell the child they can't play, and just know that when we write that we're looking to make it more of a commitment that could be up to a year. 
That is because we don't want to give the misnomer that if a child says well, I want you know a family to say that they want to be remote in a week 
and then they change their mind. 
They want to do it another week. 
We will look at each case, but it would be very challenging for us to bring back large numbers of students who think who feel they might have made a poor choice, because that would shift all of our classrooms and all of our teaching staff.
, I would totally agree with that. 
I just didn't know if it would be like after every marking period reevaluated, but if the parent does commit, I just don't want to hurt the student of course by saying. 
If extracurricular comes back in spring, your parent made this choice in september, and now you can't participate right 
and I think for us, you know being just of mine- that things could shift very easily. 
We could look to look at that come january 
and it may not need to be a year-long commitment, but we did want to write it down so that parents were aware all right. 
Thank you very much. 
Thank you for sharing this with us. 
I have two questions or concerns. 
When this plan was developed to return to school k through five the ada b day, it wasn't based on surveys that went out as to the number of parents that think they would choose remote or not choose remote. 
It was based on our entire population.
, so conceivably, if we have a, a 6 through 12 model of a day b day, hypothetically every parent said, I want my kids to return to school. 
We can. 
We can accommodate all of them in an ajb day. 
You mean physically back into school.
, we wouldn't be able to do that. 
How would we physically bring them all back? 
We don't have so at the elementary level, just very simple, math. 
We have to take out about five to six, seven kids out of each classroom in order to be able to accommodate that average size. 
My question a little bit on the six through twelve model--,, it that was based upon returning every single child to school. 
So if friday, the survey is if we have if we have more children now I understand you. 
Thank you. 
So if we have more children who are going to be on remote, we could conceivably- 
and I know we discussed this this morning in our committee- 
we could look to bring back more students. 
My question is that my concern is the same as laura is having a one-year commitment. 
I received a half a dozen phone calls today,, probably in the last couple hours about I'm concerned about the one-year commitment we know.
, that you know in remote learning it says remote instruction is not equivalent to in-person hybrid instruction right
, so it's not the same level right so for forcing kids out of school. 
What we're doing is we're creating a bigger educational gap for the following year.
, we're not forcing that would be a parent's choice, but the thing is we allow them to come back after each quarter.
, if we're able to accommodate them according to the way the plan was designed. 
Why wouldn't we allow them come back after after one quarter, so they can get that? 
I didn't think we said that we wouldn't be allowing we said that it would be really prohibitive for us to be able to reschedule them back into classrooms, but we could look at it based on the numbers that we have. 
We wanted to be honest, mr scavo, and let families know that this could be a year-long commitment, and most districts are looking at that at either january or the year long, because it is very disruptive that would mean having to up just move around the entire schedule for. 
You know our schools, which we may still have to do, should covert restrictions be lifted, but you wouldn't want to recant, and we know that that happened quite a bit where, in the beginning of all this debacle, we were putting out information 
and then something you know, alternatively, was shared, but I think we just said before with miss slattery, that, of course, if we could look at it by quarter and we felt like it wasn't going to be a tremendous feat for our families that we would do that. 
But I think that that's not probably what a parent is going to make their choice on if I'm choosing to be remote. 
It's because I'm thinking that it's unsafe for my child to be at school. 
So I'm hoping that by these presentation, slides that we have 
people will see that we've made tremendous tremendous. 
You know strides in making sure that our schools are safe, they're, clean and we're doing routine protocols to ensure that, but the commitment is a year. 
That's what this time for right! 
Now!
, so if something changes at home a person, that's furloughed now has to go back to work right, they want to and their their impression is going to be that they can't return because they signed the paper saying that they have a one-year commitment to be at. 
But I mean I think, though if, if there's something along those lines- 
and we all get those calls all the time, if there's a family, that really is in enough need and feels like they made the poor choice or not a poor choice. 
They made the wrong choice for what their their thing is. 
Going on right now, so whether a parent goes back, furloughed or their child is just not doing well in remote learning and they were to contact us just like any other parent phone call that we would have. 
Of course, we would look at every case individually, but I'm talking as a whole. 
We could not say you're going to be a remote 
and then, if you choose to decide in masses that you want to come back, we just would not be able to run the same schedule 
and then we would be restarting everything over again. 
The reason why I bring this up is: I watched the the newsday webinar yesterday we had dr johnson. 
I finally heard all about him. 
I got a chance to see him in the presentation, along with a psychiatrist along with a the superintendent of north babylon, and that exact question came up right and a lot of the experts were saying. 
I would not go past a semester. 
In fact, a lot of districts are going quarterly, you know- 
and I just don't. 
I just don't want to influence a person's decision because they're fearful that, if they sign that paper they're not going to be able to come back because the reality of it is
, is that you know when we look at the education of even a day b day. 
My concern is that, as a teacher, you can't teach the entire curriculum and now we're talking about prior learning being re-taught from the previous year, how you and you're never going to be able to teach the the entire curriculum, but the kids that at home that are not getting the same. 
Equivalency of education are going to be further behind the following year and which all we're going to do is create a a snowball effect and that's my concern. 
I mean you know I personally would like you know the opportunity that, if they, if they come back after, if they're the first quarter, which is a 10-week period or nine-week period, I think it would be a little more settling for the people in the community. 
Knowing that all right, this remote's not learning I committed to a year now, I'm stuck well
, I mean, I think I think two things right, because I agree with you. 
I don't think anybody wants to be in the position where we can't welcome back students interchangeably as they need, and we definitely know that, no matter what happens. 
Curriculum is going to be interrupted this year. 
That is a safe bet, but if we play, if it's the will of the board, if it's the will of the board to change that- 
and you would like to make that language more flexible, we're happy to do that. 
But know that we've taken, you know quite a concealed amount of time to making sure we would prefer our students not to be on remote, but if a family really chooses and needs to choose that we honor and we respect that absolutely. 
But, I mean nobody wants to do that, but nobody's the size of sagem either, and so we have different restrictions. 
That's why the question was the plan design based on the entire it was. 
It was based on of if all students were going to be a full return, then we would have to go in an a b day if we are finding, though, that we have remote students at a quantity where we can bring back students even an additional day or or by grade level seniors. 
First, ninth graders. 
First, you know. 
However, we look to plan through that. 
Then that's would be our next step. 
So just what we were saying earlier in our remote instruction, it's going to be hard to match up what exactly the model will look like until we have the survey results from our teachers and for our families, so we can match it up certification-wise. 
My biggest concern is we have kids taking ap exams and getting those kids ready for that and getting those kids ready for the next level college. 
You know we. 
We have training as much face time with with staff. 
It's absolutely. 
I agree with you 
and I'm very 
I'm very thankful. 
You know working with the scta if we ever have to think about distance learning the fact that we'll be providing two and a half hours every day for our students so running the same schedule, just shortened periods. 
You know working on google classroom interchangeably now and consistently across all of our classrooms. 
You know just right now. 
Currently we have a tremendous amount of teachers that are undergoing pd, virtually to ensure that everything is is up and running and that they feel clarified and supported in that kind of work, but you're preaching to the choir. 
I couldn't agree with you more that this is a really challenging time. 
I have a high schooler myself 
and she's in a smaller district, doing an a b schedule. 
So I scratch my head a lot right now, so I I completely respect and understand and if the board would like us to look at the year-long date, just let us know 
and we'd be happy to accommodate.
, this this will go the, remote learning actually just went out. 
That survey just went out, but we can I mean I could send it on on. 
On remind in five minutes, if we wanted to say you know that we've changed the date, but it sounds like. 
Maybe that needs to be more of a discussion if we're looking to go that route meredith engine and then jimmy so on the remote learning. 
If a parent were to choose that model, I understand that we would want them to commit for the full year, because we are devoting staff just to that remote learning we're not using a teacher who may be inside the classroom, sometimes we're going to utilize the staff that, for whatever reason, has to be staying at home to be our remote teachers. 
That's the optimal plan, so at the elementary level, it works a little bit easier in that in that fashion. 
If I'm an elementary teacher and I'm out, I can conceivably teach any of those grade levels 
if I'm a librarian, obviously that certification, et cetera et cetera, it gets a little trickier at the secondary level, because if I'm a chemistry, teacher 
and 
and I'm out- 
and maybe I don't have as many students out for chemistry- 
you know- 
then what am I giving to that teacher in terms of work that they would be doing for that day. 
So one could say that she would switch what they're doing 
and now they're going to teach more science electives and they can support any of those students who are out needing science electives. 
So it's really going to boil down to looking at the hard numbers of students matched up with the teachers that we have. 
Should we not be able to match everybody up which 
I'm hopeful we will be able to, then we would need to start entering into some sort of live streaming or larger groups of google classrooms, where a teacher, instead of having a class of maybe 25 or 26 in a google classroom, we may have to have larger numbers, and 
so then that's why the year-long decision, or not doing it every quarter becomes very challenging for us. 
If I'm a teacher 
and I'm running a google classroom of 45 kids and 
now some that those classrooms want to go back
, what classroom are they going into? 
Where am I fitting them into 
so then you're having to change people's schedule? 
It's a lot of moving parts, it is and then, if, so we have 
so children are able to through their parents, choose whether they want to come back to school or not. 
Our teachers are not electing whether they're coming back to school. 
The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning are the teachers that have reasons why they cannot return, and so, even if tomorrow, you know three weeks after school started, all of our remote learners said well. 
This is for the birds. 
I don't like this. 
I want to go back to school. 
We wouldn't then have the ability to bring them back, because, even though we did the classrooms for them, we wouldn't at that point, have the ability. 
Would we not at this time, because again, with six feet, we are, you know down to the amount of numbers that we have, 
but if, if our numbers look as such, where the remote learning is a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms, let's say, for example, instead of them being 17, that might only be 13 or 14. 
So then we could start welcoming them back, but that would be based on almost you know, looking at each student individually and being able to see how we can schedule them back into school, which is probably a very physical impossibility in the next three weeks. 
It's a little hard with our secondary schools as a as a secondary mom. 
It is it it kind of does stink 
and there's no two ways about it: our children, no child, is going to get the best education this year. 
It's just not going to happen and something we're going to try our best we'll. 
Definitely try our best right. 
If one, let's say somerset had an influx of you know. 
80 percent of their kids wanted to stay home and remote learn that would open up a lot more room, but it wouldn't necessarily mean that we would do somerset where their children win every single day and the rest of them.
, we would be making decisions that are consistent for all students, but then we might be reappropriating staff to help out in other ways in other areas, and I don't want to put you on the spot, but it's okay. 
That's why we're here 
we're on the spot? 
Have we looked into sixth grade at all, because in my opinion sixth grade is that lost grade? 
It's a grade where they're a little too young to still stay home by themselves and not only just stay home for the day by themselves, but also teach themselves kind of you know get on 
this get on the schedule 
get on the computer. 
Do what you got to do? 
Keep yourself moving on that b day. 
Have we visited something that once we get all our numbers, because I know we can't really finalize anything until we get all these surveys and numbers, but once we get all those numbers, are we going to be able to maybe look at sixth grade going every day as a possibility?
, that's absolutely you know
, that's definitely a conversation that we've been having as as soon as we know what the numbers are. 
Will we be able to welcome back additional grades, and I would I would assume that we would be having these conversations with with all of you, our administrative team, obviously as well and sixth grade is one of those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off at, because we know that they could be 10 11 years old going into school, and I would not feel comfortable myself at times, leaving my child home for long periods,, and so, we've had those conversations and once we know the numbers we'll be able to come back and report if we're able to make any changes good. 
Thank you. 
So much, no problem, just a quick question. 
Some clarification!, piggybacking a little bit on what mr scavo said. 
Are we entering the year making an assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver 100 of content in regards to secondary curriculum? 
If that is the assumption that I think you said that we're almost entering into, I mean who's going to choose what topics and what's being covered. 
Are we letting different teachers different people it just it concerns me that we're entering, 
I know, there's no perfect answer and there's no scenario that can right that, under these circumstances that you've, given you 
but. 
I guess that makes more of mr scala's point is that if we're making the assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver content, we should be trying to wait till so many surveys come back and see how many kids we can actually get 
and. 
So right, I don't have a perfect answer for it, but I can tell you what we're doing to set up for that. 
I had a chair meeting a couple of weeks ago, so our instructional leaders in each department to talk about that, especially at the secondary level, and so we would be looking at our curriculum at what are the big ideas at the end of the school year. 
What is it that the students are expected to learn so they can. 
You know move forward and pass those classes and or regence exams, we're also hoping to have a little bit more guidance in terms of the state education department in terms of what they're going to do in relaxing standards and curriculum and testing so much in how they had canceled the regents. 
We don't hope for that. 
We hope more for choice so that these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents. 
If they want to take it and see what kind of grade they get, I don't, I don't think we're looking. 
I don't think- 
and I know 
you mean it this way, but we're not assuming we're not going to be able to get through our curriculum, but we want to be real with our families. 
The curriculum could look a little bit different than what it normally does, and I know our teachers again hard workers are already looking at that. 
We've had some conversation, for example around science lab hours, usually that's seat time 
now the state education department has relaxed that, and that could be also a virtual. 
So we've already started those conversations once we come back into. 
Schools in our department means that we've been having anyway, virtually we'll continue those talks and start looking at that together. 
So this at the secondary level state the new york state, creates the standards for apn regions 
right so haven't. 
Given us clarification, okay, is through is through the college board, and so we actually are, starting, as you know, a new ap capstone program at the high school, so those teachers that are gonna begin teaching it for us this year they just went through the training for that 
and right now, ap is holding tight to what they're doing, but we also know that at the last minute they made some changes around what they did: testing wise, virtually. 
So we are advocating- 
and I think mr o'keefe spoke about this earlier- while we have not heard a tremendous amount from our legislators at this time we have been advocating, through our local boces, our associations talking to talking to the college board and just hoping for some teamwork for relief, so that families know that you know we're not looking to make any decisions that are going to make impacts for the students, but we also have to be real and they have to work with us. 
So we're hopeful for that. 
No problem, aaron, the so by the weekend we will have the figures on how many people are opting for remote learning. 
Is that,, 
all and the way we have it now is they're being committed. 
They can make a commitment for one full year, just just for my identification. 
Let's suppose it came back to say 30 percent of our district, one, which could be right, which could be what it could be sure. 
What does that change? 
Anything for us with the ab days or or or as meredith said, the sixth grade situation would, let's say, 30 remote for the year. 
Would that change? 
You know what we're doing right now.
, absolutely so what I just said with business. 
Also gonna take you know. 
Where is the thirty percent? 
It could be heavily weighted on the younger children.
, you know, is a k12 pet families deciding they want to keep them home right. 
You know it really depends on the breakdown of the of the groupings and the grades of where that 30 percent is or is it leaning more on one side of the district versus the other, it's not as clean as just if it was thirty percent, but, spaced across the district. 
That would make it easier. 
We can see some movement, I'm just not sure that I could say for sure right now that it would be at the secondary level. 
We would just need to see where it is and just aggregate that and just look at it, and it also boils down to to you know certification areas too, as well. 
How much staff we have in in each area? 
I fully understand mr scala's position on that. 
I really do understand, but I'm trying to trying to look at this, as if you put out a survey tonight which is already gone, but if you put it out- 
and it said your one mocking period 
and you could change your mind, then kind of I would say that you really 
we're stuck with what we've got this is. 
This is the way it's got to be because you don't know from market period of marketing period, how many students you're going to have. 
Is that accurate? 
I mean, 
but, but that goes to back to what we said. 
We can't put out there that you can make the decision after each quarter. 
If we're not sure we're going to be able to offer that- 
and so I know it may have looked like it- was a little bit stricter than it sounds like the board was- was willing to move forward with 
and so again we're certainly open to putting in alternate language, and we could send it as as quick as you know, as soon as we're done here or first thing in the morning. 
I certainly don't want to prohibit anybody from not doing remote learning but again, it's it's. 
We have to be practical in the size of our school district, so we can't say we're going to be able to offer things that smaller school districts can right away, but it is prohibitive based on on the numbers. 
So,, we might be able to offer that and we might be able to offer more grades into our secondary schools. 
We might be able to offer more space for our elementary students. 
We just won't know until we see all of those numbers getting to getting that number that we're seeking this weekend will drive where we go next,, and that's why it's challenging to be able to share with our staff and 
with our community what remote learning will you know essentially look like as well? 
If I don't have enough staff, I can't guarantee that you're going to be in a google classroom with a live teacher. 
I might not be able to offer that it may be based on whatever elective or store or grade that you're in it could be some sort of like a live streaming, but 
but again it really. 
It depends on on the numbers of the students that we have up against our staff as well. 
Thank you, jim just just real fast to pick it back. 
I apologize. 
I walked out for a second, if only 75 of the families respond to the survey. 
So now there's 25 of the kids. 
We don't know what they're doing no the default is that they're coming to school.,! 
Thank you no problem, so I know with elementary the teachers. 
Usually take their lunch when the students have their lunch. 
How are we working that, if they're having a lunch in the classroom who will be supervising them so? 
We do have obviously aid support. 
We are also working with our principals because we know that we're probably going to need some additional help with that, but we also know that. 
You know that lunch is managed. 
I actually thought that there was some staff that was a part of the lunch periods that might be mistaken. 
I'd have to look at that, but we are. 
We are having conversation to ensure that we have the support we need for lunch, two more. 
Actually. 
What will clubs look like virtually? 
So that's 
that's another new and exciting question 
right. 
We definitely know that clubs are not going to be able to be maintained after school physically. 
We have started to work with an online platform called passport for good and it allows clubs to run virtually and note on all their activities attendance community service hours if a child is working any of those types of hours. 
So we have to enter into conversation with our teachers about what that could look like. 
We certainly don't want to not offer clubs, but you know once a week twice a week: what sort of activities? 
How will you meet with them? 
Will google me be a part of it? 
Those are the questions that we're looking to have moving forward around clubs and one more with the staggered start times. 
Those are students still changing for gym class. 
We will not be changing for gym and we will not need to because we have moved team sports to the end and we're looking to do more. 
You know personal fitness that isn't rigorous, but we would not. 
We would not be looking to have any any. 
You know contact in that manner for our students 
[Music]. As I sat here tonight. 
I thought about saying absolutely nothing 
and I really don't know where to begin. 
I don't have a specific question. 
I can tell you that I'm incredibly angry internally right now 
and it's not at anybody in this room, but 
I thought that, I haven't organized my thoughts completely they're. 
Just bouncing around in my head, but I want to say a few things. 
First, I want to say that you did an outstanding job in the most difficult of circumstances. 
You've put together a plan. 
Every school district is in the same exact boat that we are in questions asked tonight by rob, alex laura meredith everybody here great questions, and we don't have the answers to any of those questions and we are going to be surprised. 
I think greatly by the things that we find. 
I think that you know people could look at what's going on here tonight and they may think that all of us agree on this model and think that this is what we have to do. 
I'm sure there are people watching this tonight streaming or 
we'll watch it later on 
and they'll think that if you're sitting here, I'm sitting here 
and I'm quiet that I must agree with this plan- 
and I think it's wonderful 
and I'm going to tell you that I do
n't it's rotten, it's a rotten plan. 
That's going to do tremendous damage to our children. 
I've been teaching for over 22 years. 
Now I can remember when I started there was goals 2000., maybe some people in the room. 
Remember that maybe you don't, then there was no child left behind and then most recently there was common core there's, never a time in which it seems like a bad idea, 
can't come about a bunch of garbage and nonsense that does anything but improves the education of our children. 
As I sat here tonight and I watch that slideshow 
and I watch those desks sitting so far apart. 
I thought what kind of dystopian period of time have we entered into where we look at this, and we accept this as the quote-unquote, what I hate to say the new normal, it's not normal to me. 
It's not acceptable to me. 
I want you to know that if it were up to me solely, I would defy the governor. 
I would send all of our children back to back to school. 
I would give them that opportunity. 
I believe that his edicts are completely unrealistic in terms of delivering a sound education to our children and I believe they are not well-based in terms of research and data and so on. 
So when we look at how many children have ended up with covid and what's happened to them, there's no question that covet exists. 
In my mind, I lost one friend to it. 
I almost lost a second several who had it very badly who thought they might lose their lives. 
So there's no question that covet exists. 
However, when I look at the numbers and when I look at children getting covered, what I see is that our response is disproportionate to what is going on and we are willing to just fall in line and listen to the leadership of this state, this country and do these things- 
and I know there are people who feel like me, and I know there are people who don't feel like me, a third of the survey respondents who have said I'm not comfortable sending my child to school, and I am all about parental choice. 
If you do not feel comfortable sending your child to school, then I encourage you not to I encourage you to homeschool. 
I encourage you to use the remote option if you're not comfortable with that. 
However, I feel, like I've, been denied my choice, which is to send my child to school. 
I'm willing to tolerate that risk based upon what I know, because I think that the damage being done to my child that still is in in school and the damage being done to other children is tremendous. 
I taught remotely for the last what three four months of school 
and when I tell you that I did as good of a job as anyone could do with live instruction every single day. 
All right. 
I worked very hard to do what I did and I watched kids slide into the great abyss and some of those children that I watched slide are supposed to go off. 
The princeton this fall are supposed to go to. 
Cornell are supposed to go to. 
You know you name the school 
and 
and they're going columbia and so on. 
But yet I've watched each one of them slip 
and I've watched a few hold on, 
and I've watched the most needy students that I taught completely slip
, we're not getting that back. 
We are not, and here we are and here's where we're going 
so I'll leave on this particular note. 
Sometimes it's real easy to just go along 
and I feel terrible for people like you, folks, the administration here
, it's simple and I'm in the same boat as an educator. 
It's my job! 
It's how I support my family and live my life and as a result of that, I'm forced to comply, because if I don't I'm out of a job but the solutions, we've come up with they're, not good solutions, they're, terrible solutions, and they are solutions that are going to harm each and every one of our children. 
And at some point I do believe that people who feel the way that I feel are going to have to think long and hard about how we stand up and demand what we want for our children that we think is best. 
I just want to say before I ask my last two questions that was well said bill. 
I I feel exactly the same. 
We do so well said. 
I just want to talk about the boces, because we're also feeling some questions today about boces. 
As I mentioned earlier in the meeting community meeting where there was only 50 people in that meeting,, where there was only 50 people, there was 50 how many people 50 volunteers 
and then all of our staff as well go ahead.
, you know. 
Having worked for boces for going into my 29th year, you know over the decades things change school districts go to block schedule. 
Kings park did at one point: school districts for financial purposes, decided that you know we don't want to send two bus routes to boces. 
We only want to have one route and, as a result,, they basically said to our agency look whirly standing in the am this year, or will he sending seniors in the am and juniors in the pm and they've changed things so that it accommodated him and 
our bosses always accommodated him and my concern with some of the questions with some of the students that are in cte classes, that are that are scheduled to go to carpentry and auto body, and- 
and you know whatever other programs they signed up for- is that transportation becomes an issue if we have an a day b day, those particular subject areas you have to be there every day you can't teach somebody how to sand the fender and paint it remotely. 
It's just not something that can happen, so I suggested earlier that maybe we should call boces, eastern south post and say look we pay anywhere from 14 to 20 000 tuition depending on the particular student. 
If they have an iep or not or if they need additional services, we can only stand in the am because of the situation. 
We're in you know and get their feedback. 
You know, I don't believe we. 
I don't think they want to lose the tuition.
, I agree and and uh- 
and you know I did appreciate that idea, because I'm not I 
I know you're in western 
but it was just you know, shared with us, the model that they were running, 
and so we traditionally we're share 
we're told what our schedule is, but we are quite large and I agree with you- 
we pay an exorbitant amount of money into both season. 
It's certainly worth the conversation. 
The second thing we have in-house cte classes where we have cosmetology, and you know using the same concept- 
I mean if we have to get our kids there every single day. 
The suggestion that you know we've we've done in you know boces is that we try to allocate you know: 
the junior students first year, students 
the am session this way they could take that bus up every single day right and just have to get a ride home two two days out of the week 
and then the pm students or the second year. 
Students would actually attend cosmetology and pm because many of them may have driver's license and license. 
It's just another suggestion to be able to accommodate that population of kids. 
That really need to be there five days a week, especially cosmetology students that have licensing and all that stuff which, by the way our cosmetology teacher, I mean she. 
She really just went above and beyond to ensure that the kids had the experience they needed, even if it was virtually. 
So I agree with you 
and I do appreciate that feedback 
and then just the last thing is more of a more of a comment 
and it's frustrating because I I hear what bill saying I hear 
and if you don't mind, I really do. 
Mr coggins, I. 
I don't want you to think or anybody to think that we just you know, laid low because of our jobs.. 
I think everybody knows I came from a district where we stood very tall against things that were coming down from the state education department. 
I think when you're talking about health, it's a little bit challenging, but I hope you understand- 
and I hope everyone in the community knows that at no point did. 
I think that I was doing this just because it was my job 
but because I really do want what's best for children like. 
I know all of us here, but I stand just as equally frustrated when you're out and you see people out and about in playgrounds and beaches and and whatnot 
and we're held to you know very different standards. 
But when I tell you that we're working 18, 19 20 hours to make sure we're given the best, I know it's not what we all want, but I do respect what you said 
and I really do appreciate that feedback. 
My last thing is really more of a statement and. 
You know when I look at the guidelines for opening in new york and it seems like they print a new one every week, because they change the rules so crazy,. 
You know you look at them. 
If I can say that you know john, when you said it was cryptic, it really is 
I mean you need to you know you can interpret this 50 differently.
,, but they have a mandatory column and then recommendations for best practices, which I don't understand, but it talks about ensure that social distancing, six feet at least six feet or a physical barrier is maintained between individuals while in school facilities on school grounds, including cafeterias, unless safety or care of activities such as moving equipment or elevating elevators traveling in common areas requires shorter distance of individuals. 
But then number two says: if social distancing is not possible, individuals must wear acceptable face governments
, that's exactly how we interpret what we talked about earlier if we have to move kids back into a classroom. 
The way I interpret this- and maybe legal legal counsel, give me you know 
their opinion right is that if we had to move desks closer together, to be able to not be able to, you know, accommodate the social distancing by putting masks on the kids, we would be able to do that 
and that's exactly how we started out our planning. 
If you remember we had looked at, I think it was the massachusetts model where we were looking to at least go no less than three feet 
and when we did that it was like everyone's high fiving each other everyone's coming back. 
This is great and I don't mean to put mr block on the spot, but we did receive guidance from legal and it looked as though that masks were not going to be appropriate alone, but we read the regulations the same as you. 
It was just as disappointing when we found out that was not to be mr o'keefe. 
The other day, you'd mention that if we were able to go three feet, we could accommodate every student. 
Every kid come back. 
Every student we had every building make up a class for three feet, and so we were able to say that if parents felt safe for their children to return that we were able to do that our hands are very tied. 
In terms of that, and you know again, I don't mean to put you on the spot, mr black, but you may want to jump in then 
it was a few weeks ago where you know we thought that just mask face covering was going to be sufficient. 
If you couldn't maintain the social distancing, but then the governor's office came out and clarified that and said that you have to have that physical barrier and. 
So that then took away our what we thought was our ability to have face masks, but the face coverings are okay in the hallways and the bus.
,,, there's!! 
It's not that's!, nothing makes sense, but that is. 
That's 
that's what we're following so aaron. 
As we all know, I should have had a swivel chair, john I'm just saying. 
Should I have a swivel chair, as we all know, education is is not going to be pretty this year and we want to give our children as much as we can 
and we've spent so many years working on this educating the whole child and worrying about social, emotional. 
I'm, the most emotional person shouldn't be talking about this, 
but. 
So a couple of things, our most vulnerable, social and emotional. 
As we see little children adapt much better. 
You see a two-year-old in target with a mask on it's, not a problem.
, my teenagers find the mask, uncomfortable and, and so hours. 
Six through 12, in my opinion, are our most mentally vulnerable 
and I just feel like, because things are so different. 
Are they going to be able to just go down to the guidance counselor just go down to you know, or things like that like, where they want to just go. 
Take five minutes with the guidance counselor or even the school psychologist. 
Is that still going to be fully in place opened to everyone? 
Is there also? 
I know that. 
I know that over the the distance learning period last year that our sagem north sel chairs they 
they did a tremendous job. 
Having a google meet also are are things for mental health in place 
and then my other question is what does recess look like in in covid land in elementary? 
I think, because I think I lightly brushed over that. 
So I'm glad that you asked me about that because you know so last year was the big thing that we were taking away: five minutes from lunch and recess 
and uh, there's always bigger fish to fry people. 
So, with that they're gonna be allowed to go outside 
they're gonna be allowed to run it all off. 
Are they allowed to play on the play gyms? 
Are they allowed to play ball with one another, or is it you're going to stay there and just run in place 
and you're going to stay there and run in place 
and? 
I mean, I think. 
Realistically they are children, we're going to do our best to set up so that it's a safe environment, but there's not going to be boredoms out there if they are playing ball. 
I can't tell you that we will they're going to be, as I said earlier, rotating between the fields that we have the playground equipment that we have and then the basketball courts, so we would obviously have equipment outside for that. 
We do have sanitizing stations that we will be utilizing for the students but again. 
You know, as I said I think in the beginning. 
We do not want our students to come back feeling like we're in jail, and the first thing that we had on our slides was the social, emotional well-being of our students 
and I'm very proud of the program that we have built here, and we are just looking for unique ways whether it be virtual, more push in from our sel chairs. 
You know all project kindness, all of those things we'll still have them this year. 
They just may look a little bit different in terms of the mental health staff, ms graham and the office of student services. 
Now under the direction of mram better with ms graham, we will be deploying guidance counselor. 
All of those different all of those services are still in place, but we see ourselves doing more proactive lessons as students come in and more push in into our classrooms, so that students feel comfortable. 
We know the issues that we're seeing out there again. 
Our sel chairs have sent out a survey to our students at the secondary level, and I agree with you at the elementary level we're going to be doing more proactive, resiliency skill type of activities with them. 
Our health teachers for the past year have been building a health workbook for the elementary schools that are rooted in all the resiliency skills that we have been studying using the university of pennsylvania. 
So we're really excited about what we can deploy for our students, and you know it goes back to
, we are so worried about curriculum and we are we are. 
We are going to work to ensure that all big ideas as much as we possibly can until this is all over is taught, but our first charge is just making sure that those kids feel happy and safe and healthy coming in and our staff as well. 
Our staff has not only been teaching from home prior to the summer, but they also had their own issues that they may have been you know undergoing. 
So that is our number one goal here. 
Thank you no problem, mr keith. 
Mr science.. 
One of the important questions that was asked this morning was about safety and about how kids are wearing their masks on the bus they're getting off the bus 
and now they're walking into the building with their masks on maybe a hood on
, maybe a hat on and 
they're not going to be as easily identifiable as they have in the past. 
One of the suggestions was to wear lanyards with maybe id cards. 
I'm just wondering what else. 
If there's any other suggestions, if there's, how are we gonna, I mean? 
Obviously health and safety is number one concern that that is a that is a major concern of not being able to recognize kids and especially, ninth graders, who are now new to the building. 
So we don't know any of them to begin with, and and sixth graders are now going in there right. 
So there's going to be a lot of unfamiliar faces and even more unfamiliar with me.
, so not too unfamiliar only because we do have our transition meetings for all fifth graders going into the sixth grade and then all eighth graders going into the ninth grade, and we did those virtually over the past few months prior to the ending of school. 
So all teams at the high school level, in conjunction with their middle school and then middle school to elementary school. 
We met on every single student, not just some, but all so they were able to physically see a picture of the student talk about the student all of those things, so so we're hoping right that there are similar, some familiar faces coming in but, like we had talked about this morning, the use of the student badges. 
We have never truly enforced the way that we need to now, but we would have to ensure that the students are maintaining that and showing that because they will be wearing masks as they come in. 
However, we are also spacing things out, so the kids aren't coming into school in mass quantities, so should, in fact you know, prior to all the badges coming out. 
You need to slip down just so. 
We can kind of recognize you put back up and go back in. 
I think we would feel safe and comfortable in terms of that, but we'll be working with our staff working with security and seeing what other measures that we can, you know put into place. 
John. 
I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that. 
Just to pick it back up. 
If we're going to have the kids wear their id cards just a matter of how fast can we get the idea?? 
That's the 
that's the only thing, 
and that's why I say in the beginning. 
We may just have to do the old-fashioned, put it down for a second, so I can see, but you know our staff is pretty astute and granted the ninth graders. 
We may not recognize them all, but we all you know. 
We know our students here 
so, that's obviously 
another concern would be now 
we have them wearing their i
d cards 
and of course, we all know that 10 to 15 of the kids are either going to lose them or forget them. 
Do we have a mechanism to reprint them in the building daily so that everybody has one? 
Thank you,, so just for the community, we we are able to duplicate that., thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss any other questions we moved on. 
I just wanted to make sure that we at least took a poll of where we stand. 
As on remote learning, did we want to take a poll and leave it at one full year of a commitment? 
Did we want to talk about a half year? 
Did we want to talk about a quarter? 
I think it's important that we do it now, so that we don't wait until last. 
Second 
and we're changing[Music]. 
I understand what rob was saying before about this. 
I'm just curious why it wouldn't be sufficient if we just changed the language to where we could evaluate if it were possible and had people understand that it could potentially be that long, but we could, of course, if situations allow we can, we can, we can shorten it and truncate the time period. 
Can I just ask a question to mr block: 
I mean 
I just just because I can foresee 
I'm sorry jim just because I can foresee something are 
we are 
we even legally allowed to tell somebody they're not allowed to come back? 
That's 
you know, that's a 
that's an unanswered question. 
You know 
and it's unprecedented from a legal standpoint, and 
you know I understand fully the operational issues from a legal standpoint. 
You're going to want to see more flexibility, because the concern is that family will say that being denied. 
My right education, it responds back, is no you're being educated, being educated remotely, but that's not the same type of education as an in-person education. 
So from a legal standpoint, I would recommend that there be some flexibility built in. 
I was actually going to state that if you were going to do that, still keep the year, but have a reevaluation the ability to be able to re-evaluate, as ms heinz said, that that's going to occur on a student-by-student basis.
, if there's a concern from a parent, but parents are maybe being a little bit, not almost misled, but don't not aware of the fact that there may be a re-evaluation, but that's something you may want to clarify, and you could do it in an interval period. 
You could do it. 
You know after the first quarter,, that's as a re-evaluation, for example. 
I mean. 
One of my concerns would be is that they realize what remote learning entails and they're 
I. This is not what I signed up for we're not going live, we're not doing this or not right, and then we get an influx of kids and now class sizes grow and we don't have the space to have everybody in. 
So I just I want to make sure that we have that flexibility
, I'm sorry jim 
[Music]., my position is 
I like what bill just said. 
My position was to get the true figures. 
The way it went out was probably the right way to go, so people aren't saying.
, I can experiment for a while and we never really get a true picture, but at the same time I think if you put it if the language was softened up to say, the possibility of a full year is real. 
However, you know there's going to be, independent cases that have changed, etc, etc. 
So we all know that we all know that this could all change, but to get the true figure up front. 
I think they have to be aware that this could be a full year of remote learning.., that's just my opinion. 
and I apologize. 
I don't have the survey in front of me. 
I don't, 
I think I said could be, but I don't recall, but we could certainly again put that out once we see the numbers and 
if, in fact we feel like, maybe families felt a little bit, it was too strong and they're, not really quite sure we can. 
We could send a call out. 
We could send out an email as quick as you know now, if we wanted to the reason why I asked that question is: is that we based that plan on every single student returning?
, we did so the issue is not space. 
The issue is scheduling.
, that's correct right!
, so I view it as well and and because of the six feet right, you know obviously space because of that, but the six feet parameters is what allowed us to go to this plane to accommodate every kid. 
They should be right. 
So if we don't have all if, if not all kids return, then we will have more space, obviously and then can bring back more kids. 
So so the thing is like I said: the issue is not the space matter. 
You know the plan was devised based upon every single student returning and that's why I suggested you know, maybe doing it 
once you know one or four times a year. 
You know. 
For that reason, I understand that it could be a nightmare scheduling. 
if the restrictions aren't lifted, I guess we have 13 kids. 
In a seventh grade, honest math class and we're looking at a schedule, you're going to look at the section 
say all right put them in mrs smith's class or put them in correct.
, so you know the issue is that you have this. 
You have the space, it's just more of a scheduling thing, and I would imagine that if more and more kids come back from remote learning, we could reassign teachers to classrooms.
,, and- 
and that's the point so in a year where we're already saying the curriculum's interrupted the day has been corrupted. 
That's the only thing that we wanted to minimize in the beginning and get a true account, because you don't want to be moving teachers around and upheaving schedules, but we can of course always hand select 
and. 
You know put students in as outliers who really do need to come back, but we didn't want to forget. 
I don't know who said it before. 
We just didn't want people thinking, I'm going to try it out for a week 
and if I don't like it 
I'll, go because we're just. 
That would be really good. 
A quarter you know, and that will give us enough time to do the planning and do the scheduling if we have, if we had to. 
I just think that the one year signing something this is one year, scaring heck out of people based upon the phone calls that I received today. 
So I guess we'll have to then decide. 
Are we doing flexibility? 
The flexible option, obviously is the best for everybody, but do we want to say one year or do we want to say by quarter, 
and I guess we'll vote on that. 
So if you want to do a full year, write it with flexibility, you can vote on that full year. 
Flexibility,, so just put we'll put our hands up 
and I'll 
just we'll count them all full year with flexibility or flexibility with re-evaluating every quarter.
, so, but maybe we could put what would be the best way to well. 
I think that what I suggested would be if you want to stay with the full year, but that you re-evaluate on a quarterly basis, because I just caution us to if we all of a sudden say flexibility, then people, you know 
I 
just we have to have a true account. 
School starts in two and a half weeks, and I I don't mean to be crafts about that, but we we really do, 
and so I think, mr black, the way that you had said it. 
I think you know it's a year, but we would be reevaluating it throughout the year for everybody. 
I 
I 
I like what he said. 
Does that mean?? 
I don't think that you're going to make that full commitment. 
I don't think you can quite frankly. 
So I think that the concern was being raised was that parents, under the impression that you know no matter what I do 
it's a year now
, if I commit it's a full year, that's not going to be the case. 
We're going to look at it on a quarterly basis. 
Again, it's change. 
There could be 
a week wake up tomorrow with an executive order which states that parents, you know, can make the choice on daily basis. 
You know so you know, so I. 
I think that what it's going to be is that the district will look at it. 
We're going to look at our operational needs, we're going to look at the parental needs and make you know an informed decision, but that the benchmark be on a quarterly basis. 
Would it help if we provided some sample language 
and then you're able to let us know if that language looks appropriate, because we can send that out. 
You know as quick as. 
You know sunday evening or monday morning for folks perfect. 
Thank you any other questions. 
All right. 
We are back in the agenda letter f approval of minutes. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr mike caruso second and by meredith opie. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried number two. 
We are in the visitors section public comment that pertains to the agenda. 
I'm just going to need those cards or, if you're going to call them, is fine too 
I'm going to call up the names we do have several. 
I just wanted to make a reminder announcement that the visitor section, the public comment is in fact a public comment. 
It's not a question and answer type of period, so I know that some of the cards that we are getting do have questions on them. 
I think possibly it's better. 
You know to if, if questions are asked, we can have them written down 
and we can take your email and we can have a response sent to you by email. 
If that's good or mr picarella, if you want, we can also include them in our forum on monday. 
That's fine right. 
I just think it would possibly be best to email or you know, speak with you separately regarding,. 
So the first gentleman, mr caputo, I'm sorry capuano, oh, my name is mike capuano. 
My daughter is brooke capuano. 
She goes to sagem, you have an excellent school here 
and you have an excellent school because you have the best teachers in the country. 
I believe, when you take the teachers away, you have a bunch of buildings here:,, to think that you're going to lock a child in a room with a bunch of books 
and if you could fast forward 10 years that, like a doctor or a lawyer, is going to walk out of that room. 
It's just not going to happen.
, now the main reason that we're all here is the six foot: six foot: six foot: six foot- 
that's all we're here for why? 
Don't we tell everybody that that's a farce? 
If you build the partitions around the desk, the six foot is not necessary and I called osha 
and I called the governor's hotline.
, if you build the glass petition, the teachers are worried. 
Also. 
I understand that if you build a glass petition against the front, the teachers could walk in the back and they would be behind the petition. 
711 protects their cashiers and they all come in when it's time for their shift and 
they're back there. 
Furthermore, the children could walk in behind their petitions and take their masks off. 
The teachers could be up there with the blackboards and take their masks off and everything would be back to normal. 
This is all we're all here, because we're refusing to build the petitions. 
You could take that desk. 
There's schools that have taken that desk and they divide it like this boom and boom 
and there's four children on that desk 
and it's totally legal you can be. 
When you put a mask on then or any kind of petition, they said you could be nose to nose. 
I was just in a restaurant that was so packed the booth, the person right behind me I turned around. 
I was looking right in his face. 
I called the hotline from there because- and they said as long as there's a petition, there was a petition in between the booths and the petition was only this tall. 
I was looking in the guy's eyes and they said there's no regulations for the height of the petition.
, so all we need is the petition, and all this is gone.
, second of all, second solution: why don't you just have the people that want to come into school and the teachers that want to come into school come in and the ones that want to stay home and the children that want to stay home stay home instead of forcing the ones that are horrified to come in to come in and the ones that are desperate to come back in. 
My daughter wants her teachers and she wants her school 
and she wants her friends.
, what? 
If all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in? 
Everybody who needed to came in to to help 
and they kept america going to mind odds that the schools are the only ones that let us down now, as this gentleman said these kids in five years, if we could fast forward to the ones that are starting now, they won't be able to read and write. 
I don't know how many people go to europe, but our kids already can't read and write. 
We are kids in college. 
That can't add this is the death knell of america. 
This is not some small thing here that you're deciding and there's no reason. 
These are guidelines. 
Schools all around you hop hog everything else open five days. 
This is your decision to do in the generation right here. 
Remember that this is the beginning of the end of america,,. 
We hope that they rescind this, but if they don't rescind this, this few years here will be known as the covid dummies. 
They won't make it into college. 
They won't do anything and there's no reason 
and. 
Lastly, I want to say, if you open the schools, why bother the first kid or the first teacher that gets covered you're going to close all of sagem? 
So this is all the foss all this money, the reopening programs and everything. 
It's all a big fuss,
, it's it because this is being treated like the bubonic plague. 
Mr capuano
, I'm sorry there's a three minute time limit.
, thank you. 
Studies all around the world have opened up. 
There's not one case. 
The ymca tracked their own tracing 40, 000. 
Kids, not one mr kevin. 
Thank you very much for coming. 
We appreciate it. 
Thank you so much for listening 
and I wanna say. 
Lastly, the governor said this is for us to talk not three minutes. 
I listened to this young lady for three hours. 
That was not the guidelines. 
You're worried about guidelines, guidelines, the governor said the people should be able to come in and talk not listen to. 
You guys tell me what to do with my child.. 
Thank you very much., miss muchitash. 
can I just start sure um, my name is lauren mukhitash 
I've been in station for 13 years 
now I have elementary age children, I'm going to jump the agenda. 
I'm sorry,, I'm going to jump the agenda a little bit and go to item 12. 
there's been a proposal to create a divor diversity task force in sacrum, central school district. 
I'm here to voice my support for the creation of that task. 
Force sachem student body is comprised of 25 percent racial minority students. 
Our e and l students represent a staggering 98 different languages spoken within this district of 13 000 students. 
Our students represent a multitude of cultures, religions and abilities representation matters. 
Our multifaceted student body deserves to see themselves reflected in their teachers and administrators in the books they have access to and read 
and then the curriculum they are taught. 
So I would just plead with the board. 
don't render this to a toothless subcommittee with no power. 
There are lots of things that I love about sagem, and I think that this is a step in the direction to improve upon what we already have a strong foundation for. 
Thank you. 
I'm sorry. 
Next is. 
Mr warren 
hi, my name is jason moore, I'm a parent in the community, sageman graduate. 
I would like to make a plea to the board: value and respect the school community by maintaining a high standard of transparency and communication at all times, but particularly in times of crisis. 
The communication from the central office and the board has been unacceptable. 
It is essential for every member of the school community students, teachers and families to be constantly updated at all times about every aspect of the reopening process. 
The meeting this meeting was not advertised to the school community at large. 
There were five parents outside barely and they left as soon as possible, communicate the following. 
communicate the following to community immediately. 
How will we ensure that our remote students are receiving an equitable education? 
I can't accept that they will receive a subpar education. 
You've put in your email that I received. 
While I was standing up front says it will not be the same. 
I need it to be equitable. 
I need my child to get an equitable education. 
They need to be live instruction and ongoing assessment. 
We need to figure it out. 
We need to put programmers in place. 
We need to figure it out. 
It has to be figured out. 
We cannot make an exception where part of our school community is receiving a subpar education. 
It's not acceptable, not acceptable to me should not be acceptable to you 
and it's not acceptable to your teaching staff. 
I know that for a fact. 
Secondly, a building space plan must be made available to the teacher to the parents of this community with individual room measurements and the capacity to maintain authentic social distancing at all times, and I need to know about the source of ventilation. 
I need to know what the school buildings look like. 
If you're telling me 17 kids in a classroom, I need to know that there's room for 42 square feet for every 17 one of those students I need. 
I need that in writing. 
Before I even think about sending my child back, I need clear opportunities for all parents to participate in this process. 
I shouldn't stumble upon this. 
I should be knowing about this weeks in advance. 
I need specific criteria for testing and tracing in all school buildings. 
I need a contingency plan for what happens when the rate of transmission rises above three percent. 
What do I do with my child? 
How do I make accommodations? 
I need to know these things before we put our kids on those buses. 
It's unacceptable that you're asking me to put a remote survey in place by friday, and your first parent meeting is on monday. 
That's unacceptable. 
The parents need to know. 
What's going on, the school community needs to know. 
What's going on, the teachers need to know, everybody needs to know it's unacceptable,. 
I need you to do a better job of communicating with the school community. 
Most important details need to be related to about our children's education in the future. 
address these issues immediately. 
The students, the teachers, the families in this community deserve at least this much. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much. 
Miss favaro campbell
, I'm michelle for campbell. 
I wanted to just address the board about the diversity task force. 
As all of you know, I started that email and requested that it be put on the agenda and that you all consider creating one. 
It's been 10 years that I, my daughter, started she's going to be a senior now so 10 years ago 
I actually started talking to a lot of district office, which is very changed now. 
Maybe mr scavo might have been on the board of ed back then I don't remember, but most of you are not we're not then. 
It's been 10 years, since my family started talking about the having more diversity and representation within sachem 
and I'm really excited to see it finally make an agenda. 
I want to also make it really clear that it's about race, religion and abilities. 
I want children in wheelchairs to see themselves in books in their classrooms. 
I want children with autism to know that they are just as represented as every other kid in every princess book in every superhero story, and I want to help show our curriculum expand to teach children that kids with down syndrome can be teachers, because there are stories of preschool teachers who have down syndrome and kids, who are deaf and blind can grow up to graduate harvard law, school and become disability advocates and travel the entire world, and I right now we just don't show that we don't have the staff. 
We don't have diversity in our staff. 
We don't have diversity even in the books that they see when they walk into a classroom. 
So I just wanted to thank you all for putting it on the agenda tonight and for entertaining the idea and to understand that it's actually bigger than one issue
, it's about every kid at sagem walking into their classroom, walking through hallways and right now, where I know reopening and dealing with covid, but this has been 10 years actually a little bit more in the making and sacrum is going to go on long before my daughter, who's going to be a senior and my son is going to be a freshman in high school they're going to be gone, and I don't want to leave that task force 
like I want this to be 10 years from now. 
Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program has a very different experience than what they had, and so that's really important to me that you all knew that. 
So. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss sanders,, everyone, oh, everyone, maria sanders,! 
I am a parent. 
I would like to just make a statement in respect to the reopening committee. 
I 
I was a member of the reopening committee 
and I just would like to express my disappointment in the fact that the committee had no part in the actual planning or process of of the plan that was presented to the community. 
My understanding was that we would be part of that process, but instead we had two meetings where we were basically given the list of directives as administration and and the board of vet had planned. 
So basically, we got a sneak peek and the ability to ask a few questions, though I certainly respect the time and effort and energy that administrators put in, and I will not take anything away from that. 
You fail to utilize the very volunteers that you asked for because there was a tremendous amount of talent within that grouping 
and we certainly could have helped you in putting together this plan for myself having students in second in middle school and high school. 
I recognize that this plan is not going to be adequate for them and again, 
though, I understand right now, we we're hoping that the testing standards are loosened. 
The value of a full-time education will not be, and these children cannot get a full-time education when they're in school. 
Fifty percent of the time they're only seeing a teacher, fifty percent of the time 
and they're they're sitting home in front of a computer for the other 50 that amounts to 10 days a month when normally they would be in school for five days a week. 
So I just asked that in the future, when you come to the community- 
and you ask us to step up and come in and help you really utilize us, because our voice really has not been heard. 
That's it! 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
miss williamson, nicole williamson,,, miss cologne, everyone, I'm josephine scalon. 
I have a soon to be second and third grader, and I just have a question because I'm still undecided about the virtual verse going to action school. 
If you go to school and you start in the school, do you have the option of then going virtual? 
Would that be an option? 
So I'm sorry 
go ahead. 
I'm sorry! 
So we're in this portion of the agenda. 
We're not allowed to do back and forth and answer questions. 
If you'd like we can have your question written down and leave your contact and we will answer any question that you have. 
I can promise thanks. 
Thank you very much. 
Is it allison? 
Is it on the court? 
Is her email on the card? 
There's a phone number on the card. 
Do you want to put an email perfect? 
Thank you so much, the next one was also several questions. 
Would you prefer to contact this person as well? 
I mean I mean he's been waiting, so if he wants to ask him and then it's miss rep rapuno,, thank you,! 
That's all! 
For the first section we are on page two at the bottom number. 
Three business items consent agenda a through c, and I have a motion. 
motion by bill cogan second, by laura slattery. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried sorry bottom of page three personnel consent agenda. 
A through l. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
This is kate bleedin. 
So this is an unusual way to welcome many of our new staff, as we are having our first kind of live forum most of the time we have folks here to welcome them in person, and some of you are virtual. 
We would like to welcome all of our new staff that we vetted through really intense interview processes this summer with our administrative staffs in the building and staff members, faculty involved in the whole process and. 
That includes clerical custodial teachers, teachers, assistants and I think we have also gotten to the administrative section. 
Did I catch that correctly?
, so we're through the l- 
and I just want to welcome those folks that are in consent, agendas,. 
So far, thanks number five is support staff consent agenda a through j. 
Can I have a motion motion by meredith second, by jimmy and caruso. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried christie. 
Did you want me to stop again cause? 
I think you have michael there. 
joining us today is michael emanuel. 
He is over here to my left, the far right, if you wanted to just stand and give yourself a wave, michael, is joining us today, as the network and systems administrator 
he's been a integral part of our technology, staff who have been working with jack renda in it. 
We're really excited about all the great things that we're going to continue to get the growth for our technology as we push through and put our smart schools investment through and and enhance the use of our technology for our students and our staff. 
So welcome michael, we are on the top of page 12 number six personnel administrators consent agenda. 
A through g motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried, we'd like to take a moment to recognize two other folks in the audience today. 
joining us is dennis mcelherne. 
If you want to give a wave- not quite sorry, I'm trying to stay on top of it here. 
They're. 
This close, this close sorry guys a little more suspense 
we're going to be towards the top of page 14 letter h, probationary appointment of the administrative personnel. 
There you go andy. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins? 
Second by mr wadawa discussion, discussion. 
I will be voting on this in the next two personnel items.. 
My reasons are the same as they've been for the past several board meetings concerning central administrative positions. 
That is, I believe, the new superintendent should be part of the process in any administrative appointments.. 
What I must make perfectly clear is that these candidates, as well as those from the prior meetings, are qualified and capable of the positions to which they are being offered, and I would fully support them if the new superintendent was part of the process. 
So this is a process, negative vote and nothing to do with the personnel. 
The new superintendent is close. 
I mean we're almost there 
and we certainly have qualified staff who could perform these functions for a short time as interims, so that for that reason, and that reason alone, I'm voting on the next three administrative positions. 
I must stress it has nothing to do with the individuals. 
I fully support them and would support them in the future. 
Mr kieran, just because you asked for a discussion and for the public and anybody at home by losing our superintendent, our assistant superintendent and our special ed director
, we would have left three positions open where we would have needed interims and just for argument's sake, mr o'keefe. 
What is the going rate for an interim at that level per day? 
For which position are we speaking? 
Let's say it's: the superintendent rates vary, but a going rate for superintendent is probably 12 to 1300 a day, and then what about the assistant super? 
An assistant superintendent, depending upon which position it could be 800 to 1000 a day and an executive director of special ed would also probably be in a similar range, a minimum of 800 a day. 
So what and- 
and I don't necessarily disagree with your argument- 
but what what we did was we took a vote to have these positions filled. 
We had three people doing five people's jobs and it between losing that on a normal year is almost impossible, but losing it during covet is is impossible and we put things into motion to have these positions filled by qualified people to save that money, and this is money that I mean we we already just talked about taking custodians off- that we don't even know if buildings are going to get cleaned in time. 
Now we want to take more money out by filling these positions with indoors. 
I think that that's a slippery slope if we go down that path.
, I appreciate what you're saying my. 
My position is that a superintendent of schools,, is the single most important person in the district and totally accountable to us and the district for making decisions and to have a superintendent of schools, not part of the process. 
Even though a new superintendent come in and doesn't know, the personnel is certainly going to ask the qualified people who who they are and do cement and be part of the interview process. 
I 
I think that's even more important than the saving of a few dollars here and there, but that's 
I mean I
, I see I'm alone in that position, but I stand by it. 
I 
I understand where you're coming from I just if I don't appoint somebody until september 1
, that's a long period of time at thirteen hundred dollars a day, eight hundred dollars a day, and while it seems like a few dollars here and there over a three month period that we haven't had people that it starts to add up, and when we need money down the line, I would be afraid that we put it on in a room 
is when we had qualified people who could take these positions immediately? 
I will remind you of your fiscal prudence soon, [Laughter] alex just because we're having a discussion, 
so mr 
kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight
, I I have personally known all of them. 
So it's without hesitation that I think that they are the best fit for sachem. 
I don't care who our superintendent is. 
I've trusted mr o'keefe, as our interim superintendent, to make the recommendations, and I 100 percent agree that any superintendent coming in will not find any better candidates than the ones we're putting forth tonight. 
Opposed motion is carried dennis, we're going to start with andrew larson, so andrew just want to welcome you to the high school north principalship
, andy has been a teacher in our schools. 
He's been in personnel, he's been in an elementary hiawatha principleship, a sagamore principalship, an ap and two of our high schools, and now he's joining the ranks of the leader ship in north 
and we'd like to welcome you and wish you all the best we are on letter. 
I probationary appointment of the executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion. 
motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
[Applause] dennis mclehern. 
He's 
he's welcome back to sacham. 
He has been in our school district working as a school psychologist, an assistant to coordinator for special education. 
He left for a short stint to go over to north bab as a director over there 
and we're really lucky to have him back and part of our team as the executive assist executive director for special education. 
Welcome back [Applause] and letter 
j is an approval of an saa agreement for the executive executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion motion by ms slattery? 
Second, if I miss volpe, all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 14. contracts consent agenda. 
A through t. 
Can I have a motion ocean by mr coggins second by mrs wadwa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 20.. 
It's an action, itemist number, a mandated new york state board, training for matthew, bauman and robert scavo, all in favor, get kind of a motion motion by mrs volpe second by mr man. 
Caruso all in favor opposed motion is carried number b. 
It's an appointment of board committee members. 
Can I have a motion motion by miss lottery second by mr scavo. 
Any questions all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
Letter c. Is a board of education retreat? 
Can I have a motion motion by ms wado, a second by mr bauman, all in favor. 
Any questions sure I just want to make a quick comment:, especially since we're being fiscally prudent, a retreat is not like gurneys or something it's where we all sit in a room and talk. 
I just want to make sure that that's clear, because we are not going on vacation, though, because my first year I was prepared for gurney's 
and then we sat in the same set library. 
Thank you. 
We are on the top of page 22.. 
I'm sorry 
are we 
I apologize. 
Can I all in favor opposed motion is carried the top of page 22 donations consent agenda a through c. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggin second by miss ottawa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried number 10 at the bottom of page 22 committee on special education consent agenda, a through b motion by miss volpe. 
Second by mr mancaruso, all in favor opposed motion is carried number 11 monthly reports. 
So we there was a question from the community about when the committees would start meeting and how I think that, maybe, if people that were leading these committees, we want to maybe set some dates. 
We could do something virtually 
I'd like to see the budget committee start talking about if there was a possible mid-year cut and look into any and all options that there was. 
I don't know if there was anything else that you may want to look into, but that's just one that I thought of. 
I don't know about the legislative committee. 
If mr kiernan has anything for the legislative committee,, all right number, 12, we are back on public comment. 
This portion of the public comment will be on any and all items that anybody wants to speak at. 
That's not on the agenda, and everyone will have three minutes to discuss and, like we said before, this is not a q a and a back and forth, but we do want everyone to be able to be heard. 
That wants to be heard.
, the first one is miss young [Music]., I press this., thank you for waiting for so long. 
Thank you. 
You guys have been outside the season board of education, members and community. 
It's come to my attention that vp sarah waterworld wore a bill.
,, we're a blm t-shirt at a board of education meeting. 
This is unacceptable. 
I can respect a person's right to free speech and to have their opinion. 
However, blm is a political movement and it does not belong at our border bed meetings or in our schools and indoctrinations. 
The definition of a racist is paramount in the name of black lives matter. 
The name indicates that black lives matter over the other races. 
This is unacceptable and this racism does not belong, including the blm is putting itself over our law enforcement, which many of our community are employed and of all races this once again making blm a black organization. 
Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has they have not registered as a charitable organization. 
We do not know whether the blm t-shirt, that was worn was for the black lives foundation or movement in either case. 
It has no right if any one of the board members wore my hat supporting trump, I'm sure the same thing would happen. 
The apology that was put on facebook was cynical and scolding. 
Call us as all races and insisting blm is not is not a political issue. 
Last I checked. 
Everyone in america had the same rights regardless of race, sex, color and sexual orientation. 
As specific cases of discrimination are happening in our community, then we must address those issues. 
What offended me is the use of rap music before sporting events, glorifying women's segregation, drug use and the cursing and the songs with the word and in it this is not acceptable. 
If we are going to talk about discrimination, it can it's got to be used both ways. 
So, let's start by banning that bml, not political, tell that to the murder black trump supporter bernal tramell. 
Furthermore, the disgusting political use of blm as an attack on our police and blue lives is not acceptable. 
Our community of all sects and races is made up of law enforcement. 
Blm is declaring war against all blue lives matter. 
Miss young there's a three-minute time limit. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much, miss, so conor. 
Thank you very much for waiting. 
I know that it's been a while 
okay.
, I am beyond angry at what is going on with our children.
, we are not doing the right thing by our children in any way, shape or form at this point in time whether we want to send our children to school or keep them home. 
Neither of those options currently are acceptable. 
I sent everybody board members in email. 
I got one reply challenged every one of your board members to go and spend 10 minutes in one of the one of the classrooms. 
On the first floor in the second floor of one of the high schools did any of you do that? 
I didn't think so. 
Yet you all think it's fine, obviously that we have no ventilation in the classrooms for crying out loud. 
We have to have special ventilation in the malls and other businesses, but where our most vulnerable are we don't? 
None of you would work in these classrooms in the current conditions, none of you. 
So why would you think it's okay for our children to be in there even before this, but 
definitely now now the air in those classrooms just stands there, because there's no movement, there's,, nothing and covert will stand in the air until it falls down on somebody so you're putting our children in an environment that is guaranteeing that if somebody has gold, but it's going to get on all the rest of them horrendous
, it's despicable and now I'm hearing that remote learning is going to be a joke. 
That's not okay! 
Either!, I don't want my child in one of those rooms. 
I want my child safe, but my child is taking five ap classes next year, which means he needs a robust distance learning program. 
But my understanding is we're not doing that. 
Am I incorrect? 
No. 
So what we're doing to our children is despicable and you should all be ashamed of yourself just a second. 
Mr block, just a second, mr kyle 
I'll get your answer question right now. 
I had a conversation with him. 
You know, I know that you were asking the question about the being restricted in terms of the assembly, but 
it's pursuant to the governor's executive order, one of the number of executive orders 202.45, I looked. 
I believe I looked at that one, and that was talking about social media. 
This is okay, I'm just gonna back up just a little bit just so we can keep our space now. 
It talks about non-essential gatherings., and this is not essential. 
That's correct as long as while we're virtual, because you still have the option of being virtual, the board decided to assemble. 
so so you guys decided. 
This was not essential. 
So because you decided the governor, that's not that they don't decide.! 
So who decides well, there's based upon the governor's orders. 
The governor said that this is an honest. 
The governor said that we can conduct this meeting virtually or, you can but. 
So as long as you can conduct it, virtually meeting is considered to be non-essential because you have the ability to be able to connect the virtual reality.
, thanks thank you for that. 
It's, mr black, 
so 202.45 it was extended by 202.53 and it's in effect, until august 20th,, 
next fury good evening, I'm a proud sacrum educator and a parent of three daughters who attend sageman schools. 
I'm here tonight to voice my concerns regarding the secondary reentry plan. 
I have a daughter in eighth grade 
and I also have a senior. 
I have grave concerns regarding the lack of an equitable education for our secondary students. 
These children will suffer the ramifications of this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
In some instances, this decision may change the course of their adult lives. 
I don't want that to happen to my children 
and I don't want it to happen to anyone else's. 
I implore you to reconsider this plan and attempt to find a way to make the secondary re-entry plan more equitable, so that our chm students can receive 100 of the curriculum that they are entitled to just like our elementary students. 
Thank you. 
That's all 23 board discussions. 
The first one we put on today was an adoption of the 20 2021 calendar. 
There was a talk of a change. 
Mr o'keefe. 
It's just you know something I want to bring to the board's attention because obviously administration has been meeting with district administrators as well as our teachers looking at the opening of school and just trying to be sure that we can be as prepared as possible for whatever that is. 
Other districts have taken a look at this and also chosen that option each year a district is allowed up to four superintendents conference days. 
Our current calendar has three. 
The first two are in september the september second, and third days are superintendents conference days and the third one would be. 
On election day november. 
Third, we've been discussing the possibility of having the board consider the ninth, which is wednesday
, I'm sorry, eighth, which would be the the first day of school for students to be a third superintendent's conference day in september. 
That would give staff teachers administrators everything all the time that they need to be sure if there are those last minute, tweaks changes to classroom setups changes to schedules assignments. 
Whatever the case is, you know, I had a lengthy conversation with mr barbara last night. 
You know his guidance. 
Counselors are ready to dive in to do whatever work needs to be done to make our secondary experience as good as possible, but we need the data first. 
So once we have that data we can dive in on this, we don't have much time and time is not on our side. 
So for your consideration, we'd like to talk about adding the eighth as a superintendent's conference day. 
Would we have to remove another day off the calendar for that we would just convert that date to a super. 
I wouldn't alter the calendar right now other than that. 
Obviously, since the year hasn't even begun, it still keeps us within legal limits. 
It still leaves us the flexibility if we were to have a severe winter. 
You know, maybe with the new reality of our ability to switch between distance learning. 
Maybe that can even help us. 
You know in bad storms and things like that, where we might be able to turn something like that on and not lose instructional time, but I think giving the staff that extra time, especially since we're down to the wire you know, could be helpful now on the counter side. 
Obviously, families are already starting to make plans they're ready to send kids back on the 8th 
they've already made decisions they've arranged child care. 
Whatever the case is so it isn't just as simple as you deciding let's re-adopt a calendar, and maybe it's not even something you do tonight. 
Maybe it's something you consider you think about, and maybe it's on the next agenda for the 26th, but I wanted to bring it to your attention to give you some time to think about it and talk about it. 
you know. 
Is it a possibility where we could consider that day, for additional staff planning? 
Does anybody have a question about the calendar? 
I'm just thinking we're gonna make this decision. 
We have to make it tonight, so parents do have enough time to make arrangements. 
Mr bauman, can you what kind of professional development day would it look like? 
What would it look like?
, it would be a useful day for the teachers too. 
It's not a none. 
I mean miss heinz, can speak better to the professional development days. 
None of them are going to be like the normal professional development days. 
I'm sorry
, I didn't mean professional development superintendent's day. 
Would it be a day that the teachers would be able to kind of get their stuff together?
, we so I mean, as we've been saying, our teachers have been working hard all summer ongoing professional development. 
This is really more honored space for them, so they can continue to clean up. 
Get things ready, make sure the google classrooms all their lessons, are in place. 
So not our traditional. 
You know ad camp style superintendents conference days, but we recognize that it's a tremendous amount of work to get started. 
Does anybody have any other questions? 
Does anybody want to vote on it tonight or did you was the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready? 
It came through a conversation. 
You know, administration and staff have asked for it. 
So I agree with sarah the earlier the better I would agree as well. 
We can vote on it right now. 
All right motion to change the calendar to the eighth being a staff development day. 
Second, by miss volpe, all in favor opposed the calendar is done, get that information out to families as quickly as possible. 
The next item up for discussion is future board letter writing. 
This is something that I personally put on. 
I 
I don't think that we should be putting letters out to the community if, with all of our names on it, if we don't agree with what it says, and I could be in the minority on that- 
but I'm I would be fine with writing a letter, putting spaces underneath and letting those who agree. 
Do it now 
most times it's a nine, nothing 
and there's no issues 
but. 
You know I personally didn't agree with the letter that got put out and if my name is going to be on it especially admonishing another board member. 
I have to agree with it 
and that's just the way I personally feel about it. 
I understand that we're a body 
and I get that, 
but at the end of the day, it's our name 
and we have to put our head on our pillows 
and if we don't agree with something I want everyone to have the freedom to not only say that but be able to just to live with the decisions that are made and to be able to stand up to the community and say here. 
I did this or I did not do this and have a straight face when you say it, 
I 
I just 
I didn't agree and 
it's my fault for you know ever putting my name on that piece of paper. 
So I just I want to put it from here on out. 
If anyone has an issue, feel free, but if, whatever letter it is, we write the letter, our names are on the bottom and we can sign the letter if we agree with it. 
If we don't, we take the space away and then you don't have to sign it. 
If you don't want to, but at least you can, you can make your own decision and you don't have to feel like you're beholden, 
because maybe it's only five people who agree with it and five out of the nine agree and now, all of a sudden, it's a board decision and your name goes on it, no matter what jim so
, how do you determine whose name is going on suppose four people want the letter out is: is that sufficient to send the letter with four names? 
That's! 
That's why it's up for discussion, so I did it. 
So it's got to be a majority. 
Take to even have the letter go out, so five members have to support it and then, let's suppose it's a 5-4, the letter does go out board of education and the five members who agree with it sign it. 
That's 
I'm going to see that if anybody had an issue with that, I I just wanted to address it tonight so that we haven't had a chance to get all together in a room. 
So so let me express you on the opposite end of the spectrum. 
If four people want to put a letter out and it's a four or five board, the four people be able to put a letter out, because the way that, when you sign up for the board of education, you sign up as a group, and you vote as a group- 
and, listen, there are things that happened in the past. 
Why? 
I was on the no side of a vote where I got dragged to the mud, but I signed up for that. 
You know, so my my impression is that five is a majority and and it's what moves resolutions and it's what moves you know. 
You know different different incent, you know initiatives and so on and so forth. 
So so I think the easy way to do that is that when you're getting attacked by a community member, because of what the letter says, your response is look the board. 
The board majority voted on it. 
I don't necessarily agree with it. 
You know, if you have concerns, contact the rest of the board. 
You know 
and that's how we leave it. 
Just just my just my personal opinion this I happen to disagree 
only because when we pass, let's just say the new principle for sage of north in the in the minutes, it will reflect that jim voted.
, it's not going to vote that., we voted, but if you go look in the in the back to it, jim can say I 
I 
I said and 
he could say anybody to the community 
and here's why I voted and he could put his head on his polo 
and he's fine like it will not reflect that. 
I said and, and just, I think it's wrong- that you get dragged through the mud on stuff that you voted for, and you can't even back it up, because there is no record of you ever saying.
, unless you look through certain things on votes, but if it's a letter, there's no record of anybody saying, but if the letter's coming from the board of education is it coming from the board of education? 
Is it coming from five board members? 
I mean I, so I guess my point is: I don't think we should be writing any letter. 
That's admonishing another member 
I mean most most letters are in agreement to the state saying we need our funding to the state saying we don't agree with certain things that they're doing, but we should certainly not be or so and maybe, mr black, you can answer this. 
When we get elected to the board of education, my voice means nothing more than anybody sitting out there. 
My voice only means one as part of us nine. 
We 
I have no 
I can't decide anything. 
I have no more decision making than my neighbor next door. 
My my only input or influence comes as as a board of nine, so the letters that we had done previously, like supporting our seniors graduating in person or the denouncement of betty devos as the education or denouncing racism that was issued as a board, not as me as an individual. 
So I think legally, mr black, if you could just give us some guidance here that, when the board of education of sagem school district issues a letter, I think it has to come from the board. 
If laura slattery, who who lives in wisconsin, wants to send a letter to governor cuomo, then I signed my name: laura slattery, not laura slattery, ch, board of education, trustee and- 
and that's 
I feel that me on this board, I'm not a republican democrat independent anything. 
I am representing a community of 55 000 registered voters, my personal opinions or anything I feel 
personally does not matter when I'm sitting here with the nine nine of us. 
My only thing that I can do as a board trustee is in as a majority of this board. 
Unless, legally you see something, that's how I feel I was elected by the voters. 
I was elected by my sachim community. 
I 
I feel like I have to represent my sagem community as one of nine, not as laura slattery individual and, of course I don't think, that's being suggested, but we're a governing body and every governing body around the country operates that way. 
You operate as a body, you're elected to be part of this body. 
You make decisions as a as a body. 
There may be differences of opinion, that's part of our democracy. 
That's what makes our country great you'll, be able to express those opinions. 
At the end of the day, you have to make a collective decision, and then you have to abide by the decision that that body makes one possible solution. 
Is that? 
If you are going to issue a letter and there's concerns that dissenting members vote is not going to be known like it is? 
When we take a public vote, you can take a public vote to send the letter, and then you can adopt that letter as a majority vote. 
Those who dissent are on as a matter of record 
they're on 
they're on record
, if that's the case, so so you're saying that no one member is allowed to remove their name from a letter. 
I would say that that's not typical practice that you would see, but is it legal for a member to remove a name?, if the, when your letter is going out, I don't think it typically sets forth all the names. 
I don't know. 
I don't really like to say it. 
Has it printed all your names on the left side, it says, there's a list of all the names and on the bottom
, it's the president's name. 
So, on the left side of the letter it has all of our names listed. 
But that's your that's! 
Your letterhead lists all your names. 
It doesn't indicate whether or not you voted for that letter to go out or not. 
It's you're represented on that letterhead. 
It's an official board of education stationery! 
That's why your name is on there. 
It's not signaling that you voted for that or not, but the recognition is, though, that when you do take a vote or when the board puts out material that that's so 
so that's a fine
, that's a compromised decision. 
I think that any and all letters should be discussed in public and voted in our public. 
That is a concern that you have that's one way of addressing it. 
I I was just going. 
I was just going to say that that sounds like an excellent idea and that really just goes back to 
you said about my vote. 
You know is on record and your eight votes are on record for these fine individuals here. 
So that would be the same thing. 
We discuss a letter. 
You know we take a vote on it.
, if it's a majority vote, the letter will go, but the dissenters are also in the minutes. 
I like it 
and I'm 100 in agreement with that. 
This way, it's a public discussion. 
Anybody can look back, but then we still are issuing a letter based on a majority of the board, but as long as there's a record of who votes and who votes?
, I'm correct. 
I am 100 fine with that. 
Just one statement and me and laura have gone round and round about this before, but I want to. 
I want to make this point. 
Look we're all elected members to this board as any elected official is. 
If I want to write a letter- 
and I want to sign my letter bill, cogan board trustee sachem, I'm 100 within my rights- to do that. 
It's a matter of opinion as to whether or not I should do that 
if I want to get together with four other board members and each one of us want to sign it as board trustees. 
Once again, we are within our rights to do that. 
All right. 
It may be perceived as a bad idea by this board, but there's nothing illegal about it.
, inside it's not a vote. 
I don't think we're going to take here. 
I just I just wanted to make sure that we discussed it and there was at least a public so that all future letter writing is done in public and just also just to add to it. 
It's been customary that at the bottom of the letter, the signature block states, the president's name on behalf of just signed the letter sincerely the sachin board of education and not place the president's name on the bottom of the letter.
,, the last item up for discussion is the diversity task force. 
So, as you guys know, I gave you guys all an outline about what just got a little bit closer.
, I gave you all the an outline, probably in the end of july, and I don't know if you all got a chance to look it over. 
I shared it with the board again the other day. 
Sarah. 
So I would just like to make a motion to put it on to vote tonight on establishing this task force. 
I mean my my only issue is, and I don't have a problem with this diversity task force, but the way community committees are usually done is that we could vote to establish one give direction to administration to come back as to what the charge is going to be talk about the charge and then approve it. 
I 
I 
I would say that that's that's, probably the route we should go and in the years that have been on the board
, we establish construction capital projects, committees and you know some are established for one specific job 
and then they 
they they disappear, and that was for one of the. 
You know construction projects that we did after that 
we didn't do any for a while. 
So we didn't need that organization, but I would say that we we either vote on it tonight.
, we want to pursue something like this. 
We understand what the end game is, what we're trying to achieve and then normally what happened is administration would put together a packet of a pamphlet, that's made available to the community. 
They could download it in a pdf format. 
People would sign up for it submit in the same way they would for a budget advisory committee. 
You know or so 
or you know any other thing, so I would just say that we we follow that format. 
You know and- 
and you know, we're not adopting exactly what the world 
but we're establishing a diversity, task force and and charging administration to come back to us with what the charge is going to be. 
I would have no problem with that. 
Any questions everyone all in favor of 
I'm sorry, yep. 
I read the whole thing like lots of times. 
I think it's great, you know we need it here in saturn, all in favor, all right any opposed. 
Mr picariello, this still one visitor that we had called wasn't here at the time. 
miss williamson. 
Thank you, miss williamson, I'm sorry! 
I know that it's late, I apologize. 
I was doing yard work 
and I was listening. 
Thank you and I had to come 
so I apologize. 
This is my first time doing anything like this, so I really don't have anything written out or able to look up anything outside. 
So I'll tell you about myself. 
I have four children, three at hiawatha, two of them with severe nut allergies and one of them with viral induced asthma. 
I didn't, I don't really know.
, let me just go with this. 
My kids are fine, they will be homeschooled and they will be homeschooled.. 
What about all the other children that aren't as lucky as my kids? 
How come? 
Nobody is talking about them? 
How come what nobody's talking about the children getting hit at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't eating at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't learning or being sexually abused at home? 
Nobody cares about those kids. 
I hear a lot of things, how we're emptying the rooms and there's going to be nothing in there? 
No one's allowed to touch each other, no one's allowed near each other. 
We're not we're teaching our kids to be scared. 
I was scared for a long time. 
I've been hurt. 
I've been scared of allergies and a nut killing. 
My child fear cannot run us. 
We need to stand up for who we are and what we believe in 
and I believe all our children deserve a fair chance at life 
and we are not giving it to them. 
I think I think that's it. 
Thank you very much. 
I know that you waited a while. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Letter c is board of ed discussion. 
Future agenda items future discussion. 
Items excuse me: does anyone have anything future to talk about covered three tonight? 
We, the next meeting. 
I don't know if that's the right date. 
That's today.
, the 26th is august. 
26Th
, we're hoping to still be here at 7, 30 p.m. 
Can I have a motion to move into executive session 
now we need a reason. 
Mr block, we're discussing we're discussing property,, property. 
I'm sorry! 
I just lost me. 
First real estate transaction, real estate transaction. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins say goodbye, mr bauman. 
All in favor meeting is good. 
Thank you very much. 
Everyone good night be careful. 
Going home,.
Thank you very much. 
is [Music], read the congratulations, so,,, visitors!
, everyone rise for the pledge and then remain standing for a moment of silence with liberty and justice for all. 
Thank you [Music] good evening. 
Everyone, as you can see, the board of education is attempting to return to some form of public meeting, which is also compliant within the limits set forth by the governor's executive orders and the guidelines of the cdc and department of health. 
We must limit the number of people permitted to be physically present as a part of our compliance with those obligations. 
Perhaps the most important item for our meeting tonight is a public discussion about the reopening plan for september, as it pertains to the plan. 
We hope to have answers to most of your questions as part of the presentation, but may also need time for the administration to research, an issue on occasion. 
You can always email the superintendent with the question as well. 
I am also aware that some attendees may wish to speak about matters related to conversations that occurred on social media and the role of the board of education. 
In that regard, if you wish to speak, be sure to fill out a card and give a card to the district clerk. 
There will be two opportunities for public to speak at this meeting. 
The first is limited to comments relating to agenda items only. 
We will then move through the agenda after We complete the agenda items. 
A second opportunity for public comment about non-agenda items will be provided. 
I ask that all present be reminded to be respectful of one another. 
The administration and the board. 
Also the opportunity for public comment is just that public comment. 
The board of education will not engage in debate or back and forth with the public during the period of public comment in an attempt to provide all who wish to speak an opportunity to do so. 
Our policy limits comments to three minutes. 
There may be people who wish to speak, who have been left outside due to space limitations. 
ask security station at the doors for a card and they will bring it in to the clerk again. 
While we respect the community and we always want to provide people with the opportunity to be heard if things devolve into personal insult or invective as the president, I will entertain a motion to adjourn the meeting. 
I thank you all in advance for your cooperation to start tonight's meeting. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe are going to make a presentation about our reentry plan. 
Sure miss florio. 
Could you fire up the cameras for us 
all right just give us a moment. 
While we wait for that and while we're doing that, I'd also like to apologize to those from watching from home, because, unfortunately, obviously from that distance you're not really going to be able to see we screen. 
So for that we're very sorry. 
You know, unfortunately, the limitations of how many people are in the room you know have we been able to move it to an auditorium. 
we certainly would have done that, but we're limited to a total of 50 people or 50 of a room's capacity. 
Whichever number is lower, so, unfortunately we're at that 50 capacity in this room this evening. 
This document, we're going to show tonight again is another evolving document. 
Back on the 31st, we placed the district's plan on the website, as required by state law. 
the district's plan on the website had to talk about three different models for return, which the district's plan on the website did since the plan was posted on the website. 
You may have seen additional commentary from our governor where he has since changed some of the parameters, such as offering additional opportunities for choice for family and or for staff. 
So we need to take those things into consideration. 
So again, this document and the presentation you're going to see this evening is the most accurate as of now, but it by far is not completed at the conclusion of tonight's meeting in this presentation, you're going to get a copy of this presentation emailed to you through the school messenger system, it'll also be up on social media and it'll, be up on our website, you're, also going to receive an invitation to participate in a survey regarding choice. 
It's a follow-up to the survey that we sent out last week, where we asked potential preferences, this one's going to need to be more definitive where we actually need to know which families are looking to have which families children receive instruction at home versus those that are willing to send children to school. 
So without further ado, I'm going to ask miss heinz to start us off. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe. 
So this morning us actually concluded and had us last committee meeting, which culminated in the plan that us're going to be sharing with you tonight and, as mr o'keefe said, all of the community members will be receiving at eight o'clock a phone call to this manner and also the plan and the survey for remote learning. 
I just want to thank all of the folks that were on that committee with us. 
We are made up of several community members unit leaders, staff of all sorts, and it really has been a pleasure to work with everybody. 
Excuse me one second, while I got this on, so after a tremendous amount of feedback that we received from our survey from our community and given the lengthy documents that we have given out and the models over the past few months, I can happily say that we are able to offer a full return for our elementary students k-5, as well as a full return for our students with disabilities, our special class, which would be our 15-1 classes, our 12-1 classes and our 8-1 students, and at the secondary level due to size and the fact that, because we will need to reappropriate space at both levels, elementary and secondary, we will have to move forward with a hybrid model for grades six to twelve, and that will be an a b schedule based on alpha and household. 
The reason why we were able to offer a full return for our elementary school is because mr o'keefe and myself and we instructional directors and our director for facilities and the building principal began walk-throughs. 
Last week. 
we walked through each and every room in we buildings to space and measure at six feet. 
On the average we are able to fit about 17 students in a class. 
Now again, know that we have scheduled a full return with our total population, so with any remote instruction that would diminish the amount of students coming into our schools, so we would actually have even more room because of the re appropriation of space we needed about one extra section or one extra grade level k5 at each building generally, so we are going to be utilizing space in our libraries in our arts and our music rooms and other common areas, which we'll talk about a little bit later on remote learning is something that, as you know, last week, it was confirmed that we will, as districts need to be offering this to our students as well. 
This will be a parent choice and a consent tonight at eight o'clock. 
Again, when you receive that plan, there will be a survey in there 
and we ask that only parents who are looking to remotely instruct their child fill out the survey, and it is due. 
It is a fast turnaround by friday. 
We need to be able to staff and schedule the remaining students that We have coming into We schools, remote learning again, 
that is by a parent's choice with consent and at this time it is a decision for the entirety of the 2021 school year. 
I say this now because, based on the number of possible staff who may also look for accommodations, that might mean staff members staying home in conjunction with our students, we need to match up to see if we have enough staff members who are going to be able to offer remote instruction or should we have to look towards live streaming. 
If we do not have enough certificated staff that matches up with the number of students, and so therefore we would not have possibly a physical space for students to come back to. 
If that were the case, should, of course, all restrictions be lifted through the governor's office, then we would have to, and hopefully would have a little bit of time in between. 
We would just have to restructure and reschedule to ensure that all students are able to return remote instruction will entail. 
It is not like being in person school and it is not distance. 
Learning. 
Distance learning is only going to be offered. 
If, again, we are ordered by the governor's office to remain at home. 
All students and all staff remain at home, and that would be live instruction for two and a half hours on google me that would be k12. 
Remote learning is different. 
This is, more asynchronous learning with possible, live or streaming teaching happening throughout the day. 
This would also be a schedule that would look a tad different based again on the number of students and how we would need to support everybody, but we just did want to be. 
You know fully upfront and present about that. 
We also know that devices for We 
We are not a one-to-one school district. 
We have definitely made some strides and We are in the middle of major infrastructure work that is going on. 
We just did order about a thousand new chromebooks in order to be able to disperse for families that do not have any technology in their home at all, but it would be difficult for us to provide a device for every student in their home 
should their be on remote learning. 
So that would be something that the family would also have to consider. 
Students will be expected to complete all assignments daily and any students, obviously with disabilities on remote learning, would be provided all of Students accommodations as per iep. 
As for their iep okay, it's important
, I'm sorry, it's important to just also talk about the secondary hybrid model for six to twelve. 
On your a day, let's just say, you know, for the sake of just explaining it to everybody, it would be a combination on on a day. 
You would be in your child would run their traditional regular schedule. 
their would leave with homework and any work that would be on their google classroom for the next day that their are home, while the teacher is then teaching the other second half of the class on b. 
Obviously, our teachers are committed folks and our teachers would be checking in answering any questions within that 24-hour period, but we would expect that at the secondary level, again, kids will be making sure that all of kids assignments are completed and kids are, and kids are present. 
Attendance is important as we move forward in this school year.
, now that we shared with you a model of how we're looking to return our students, I think it's very important that all families and community members now our staff knows about the health and safety measures that we are putting in place, and we continue to look to put more in place as as time goes on, masks will be required for all staff and students, both in school and on the bus. 
Remember that the bus is an extension of school, any students are having any difficulty wearing a mask for medical reasons or because of a disability will need to submit documentation. 
As always, they would affirm this with they building principle or through the office of student services. 
Mass breaks will be provided because remember in our classrooms. 
Our desks are six feet apart and in the regulations. 
Children do not have to wear a mask during instruction. 
We would encourage, of course, that masks be worn at all times, but that does give We the opportunity to give multiple mass breaks whenever a child does need it, while they're being instructed masks are to be worn, though, however, in the hallways cafeterias, if they're being instructed masks're not eating recess any other common area that we would just want to be safe,, we also every day. 
I'm, excuse me. 
bus travel will also include, as I said, before, social distancing practices optimally. 
We will be looking for six feet spacing and encouraging family members to sit together. 
Every day, parents and staff will be expected to fill out an online health screening survey and in this presentation, when you do receive it, you will see a hyperlink in there that you can see a sample of what it looks like ahead of time. 
We are also. 
We also took time to ensure that at arrival and dismissal, varied entrances in all of We buildings will be sanctioned off to separate grade levels. 
If they come off of the bus, we are also looking to take off the grade levels at increments of time off the bus. 
So everybody is not coming out at the same time so again, just looking to work ways to have plenty of flow while classmans may not look typical, especially at the younger levels. 
You may not see some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see. 
know that our classrooms will be warm and inviting like they always are, because they teachers will be there. 
their teachers principals will be there and we will still be able to decorate it. 
we will just not be able to decorate it with things that kids will be touching, because it would need to be sanitized every day. 
All classrooms will be devoid, as I said before, of any of those items that may collect germs. 
We are in the process right now, of setting up opportunities for our teachers to continue to clean out our teachers our teachers own personal items, and We are also moving out any unwanted furniture that we don't need in the room so that we can maximize 
the space hallways and other common spaces are being marked appropriately to ensure social, distancing, so markings on the floor items around on the walls and that's also shared later on in our presentation. 
So you will be able to see it at home as well. 
When you open up the link hand, sanitizer stations are located throughout each building, all along the hallways. 
We will also be having them at the elementary level or any other area for gym cafeteria time when, at the secondary level, them're able to go out so 
as children go in and out, they can use a hand sanitizer as they come into school. 
All of those. 
You know, welcoming areas would have a hand sanitizer station as well and at the elementary level. 
We would expect that the students, because we do have sinks in every room they would be washing they hands before and after snack and before and after lunch., so continued on. 
As I said earlier, we have reappropriated spaces at the elementary level and we are in the process of doing the same walkthroughs. 
Now in the secondary buildings. 
We know it's going to be very difficult, especially for the cafeterias to be utilized the way that they typically are, because children cannot sit in those tables together. 
So moving in some desks, looking at classroom use all of those different types of things, but really at the elementary level. 
We will be using again if We're going on full return for all students. 
Right now in elementary school, we would be looking to utilize our music space, our art space, and so therefore, those special areas become pushing for our students. 
We have worked with those departments and We'll continue to work to make sure that those departments have everything that those departments need for those departments lessons and equipment. 
Cleaning of all buildings will occur daily in the evenings in each classroom. 
We will also provide hand, sanitizer, wipes, gloves and any sort of spray bottles and wipe offs for for We staff and or students who feel encouraged to clean in between applicable filters have also been changed in our classroom events. 
We will also look to open up We windows 
and We doors where we can. 
Obviously you know the reverse was safety making sure that your doors were always locked. 
Your windows were always closed. 
Now, we're being encouraged by the department of health to please use fresh air when possible. 
So we will look to do that prior to it becoming too chilly up. 
Isolation areas have been identified in our buildings, and so, if a child is it has any sort of of symptoms or they come to school 
and they have not filled out the health screening. 
Those students would be placed there so that we can offer a temperature check and make sure that everything looks okay before we send Those students down to Those students 
classroom hygiene protocol visuals will exist in all buildings if Those students're not there. 
Already and again I share those with you at the end of our presentation so that you can see those. 
We will also be having routine hygiene drills much in the same of how We have regular school building drills at this time. 
Unfortunately, no visitors will be permitted in our schools. 
We just cannot provide enough secure measures for We staff and our students, and so again We will be limiting all visitors. 
Both traditional fire and hygiene. 
Drills will be conducted elementary snack and lunch will be in the classroom to minimize flow and secondary lunch. 
It may be in the cafeteria and alternately in the classrooms. 
We will also rotate any outdoor areas so for recess any of those other matters classes will be rotated on the game field, the basketball court, let's say, for example, and in our playgrounds students, are encouraged to bring their own water bottles. 
We do have bottle filling stations in all of our buildingsWe . 
We water fountains, unfortunately, will have to be closed at this time.
, so just some additional elementary return details that we wanted to share with you. 
You know it's always tough to start with health and safety, because again we don't want it to sound, like our students are returning to jail, but we do want to make sure that we students and we staff feel safe for the return. 
But know that, on top of everything that we are doing, the social emotional well-being of our students is of the utmost importance to us, as well as of us staff, and we have surveyed students and we are looking to survey further the rest of we staff to just find out what are some of those underlying issues or concerns that people have. 
So we can ensure that we have we mental health staff there for supports. 
Unfortunately, we we will have to stress that students may not share materials. 
At this time, students will be assigned students own independent, math, workbooks and guided reading baggies will be provided weekly so that we have time to interchange them out clean them up and leave them for the weekend, so that there's a two to three day lag before the children pick up a new baggie and in those items we will integrate. 
As always in our literacy and our math, our science and social studies, topics whenever possible, this will be in addition to the strong direct instruction that our classroom teachers provide. 
Already all all students will be benchmarked for all all students ela and all all students math to identify all all students present learning levels. 
Curriculum will be retard as needed. 
We definitely know that this will need to occur for math, and We have provided some slides in the past that show you that We're fortunate we created our own math curriculum here 
a couple of years back 
and we know the the one to two units that each grade level will probably need to go back to so that, if I'm coming into second grade, I'm certainly not going to be able to start on my second grade. 
Math curriculum 
I'll need to be re-taught, some of the materials from when I was in first grade and for literacy. 
Once the teacher knows the collective levels of what they have in they room, they will be able to accommodate those literacy. 
Lessons around that art and music will be a push in again to minimize the flow, and we are currently working with our art, music departments. 
This is one that was a really tough hit. 
Music has to be 12 feet. 
Apart for any coral or any sort of wind instruments, we are working we hardest with that department. 
we are very fortunate here. 
we have a very strong music program and we do not want to see that diminish, 
and so we are looking for ways to think out of the box in order to be able to offer course opportunities that might be in smaller sections and different ways to offer lessons as well, but we have provided and are keeping all lesson areas in the elementary schools, so that students can still maintain lessons as needed. 
Physical education will be a mix of separating two classes. 
Typically, that are adjoined, so one class will be in the gym. 
One class will be outside and inclement weather they will rotate between the gym and in the classroom.
, mr butel and miss mcentee have reworked mcentee curriculum to ensure that all team sports will be done in the spring, so all of those units will be taught in the spring and in the beginning it will be more personal. 
Fitness. 
Traditional grading will also return for our students. 
While we know that there may be some interruption in terms of what model our students may have to face, where we hear rumors that we may have to go to distance learning sometime later in the fall. 
We fully believe that by using google classroom no matter what we will be able to make that seamless transition to distance learning should we need- 
and we are well prepared, as opposed to when the crisis first happened, and most school districts were really just grasping at straws, 
but we also know that the accountability is something that is very important to our students very important to our community and especially to our students who are at the high school level. 
As I said before, google classroom will be utilized for communication at both the building principle and classroom teacher level. 
We really want to make sure that parents are on one medium so that parents can see any communication, email messages, lessons etc, and at this time We are going to enforce, to ensure for the safety of We staff and other students that any sort of instruction that is done on google classroom or virtually that our students adhere to our district code of conduct. 
When students this year sign on families sign on to look at schedules, families will be asked and prompted to sign off on certain measures around this. 
I just wanted to share with you some of our pictures that john 
and I took as we went around in we walkthroughs. 
These are some samples of our our elementary classrooms. 
Again, they're, not decorated, yet, of course, but you can see that we have removed a lot of the traditional. 
You know, wonderful items that we would see in a classroom, but again we really wanted to maximize space and ensure that the teacher had space in the front of where their smart boards are and then also making sure that kids had room and were not. 
You know pushed up too too much, so we still are adjusting that once every single classroom is created at the building level, we will be returning mr o'keefe and I, with we team, to just ensure that everybody has space both the teacher in the front of the room and then students around. 
So again, we are fortunate here. 
we do believe that we have enough staff to move forward and should the numbers for remote learning ensure even more flexibility. 
We may be able to open up more sections in our elementary schools and at We secondary levels, bringing back more secondary students. 
This is at one more of the elementary school and to the right there. 
You will see a classroom at the secondary level.. 
This particular sample is where we marked it the a and b desks, so that students will be sitting 
and then it will make it a little bit easier for cleaning at night for our custodial staff.. 
This is this is also a little bit of a tough share here, because I know that we've been getting a lot of questions about child care and upk. 
First, child care: we are still going to be providing am npm child care by boce by scope, educational services. 
They continue to offer right now child care throughout the pandemic for our essential workers, and They are happy to move forward to offer this services for all of our students. 
At this point, though, we are on hold for we upk program, and that is not because we don't have the space or 
we don't want to, but we simply have not received the allocations yet from the state, and that is how we are able to run we we upk program. 
While we do have many students who do a tuition based into our our upk program, it is simply not enough to substantiate our our upk program. 
Should we not get the allocations, so we are advising parents at this time. 
I know I've. 
I've answered many phone calls many emails if you are need, if you need care, if you would like your child to go to an alternate preschool now is the time to seek that out just to be safe. 
However, if we were to find out about the allocations tomorrow, we would also be able to implement that. 
You know moving forward, so we have not changed anything we're not changing any spaces at this time, we're just kind of on a standstill but to be safe. 
we just encourage you to look just in case. 
Excuse me, ms hines, yes. 
Actually, since we last spoke earlier today, I spoke to mr duffy, he's the executive director of scope and runs our upk program just trying to see if he's heard anything further about our our upk program and he has not heard much more than we have. 
As a matter of fact, there was a meeting earlier in the day with the suffolk county, superintendents, as well as mr wix who's, the regional superintendent for eastern suffolk boces, to see what boces knew about upk funding and again their contacts in albany have been very, very quiet on it. 
The only information they've received is, you know, floating a balloon from albany that they're considering opening upk up, but they may only fund it at 80 percent of what the grant would be. 
So that would mean if the district wanted to move forward. 
That would be an expense that was not budgeted for and we'd have to make a determination. 
You know to take those monies from elsewhere to support our our upk program, so it sounds like they're getting closer to a final decision, but I'd have to keep the border prize, so it might be a model in which we'd have to support 20 of the program to make it move forward. 
So I'll keep you posted on that. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe,, and then on to now our boces cte program. 
So those are our students because we do have two. 
We have cte programs that we house We. 
They will still remain on the a b schedule, but the but the bose cte programs, where students get on the bus and go to boces. 
Boces did alert us last week that they will be providing that in house they do have the room 
so that will be live every day and for those students 
we will still have busing from our high schools to and from the program. 
We at this time, though, say that We may need family support in terms of if your child might need a ride to school if they are going to the program in the afternoon or alternately. 
That is, that is not solidified. 
Mr o'keefe and mr savone are looking at that through transportation to see if we might be able to accommodate and pick up individual students at their homes. 
That would only be for those choosing remote learning right. 
Only those choosing remotely. 
Thank you,,. 
So here I just. 
I share the hyperlinks that you will see on on the presentation that that we've sent home for the sake of time, I'm not going to go through all of these links, but the top is a sample of our health screening form and the bottom of our all the protocol visuals a sample of them that we have smattered around every single building and so for we next steps. 
As we said this morning, we finished we planning committee meeting where we laid out the the final steps here with our district leaders and our volunteers. 
Our board of education, pres presentation is, is now as you can see, and then we also have a live community forum on monday at seven o'clock and we will be live streaming it. 
Similarly here, however, I would envision that we would be a little closer that so that you can see we a little bit more clear, but on friday we will be sending out a survey just asking community members for questions that community members have. 
We will collate those into subject areas and we will look to our best answer. 
Any questions that you have as well as our building administration will be delivering a common q, a sort of like fact sheet about further details pertaining to to the buildings, and this will include sample schedules for all of our students- orientations how those will go out for our grade six on our grade nine. 
Some of that will be virtual and some of that will still be activities just broken up into smaller increments at the building, as well as arrival and dismissal times and bell schedules for secondary students and then, lastly, as governor cuomo had ordered on friday, we are in the process of updating our district website for protocols for any symptomatic individuals testing. 
We are not responsible per se for testing We, but We are responsible for offering a plan. 
Should a student or a staff member go home, a student or a staff member are required to go, get testing where that could occur, and then, of course, a student or a staff member can't come back into school until testing results have been provided and then contact tracing as well.. 
So that is the end of our presentation this evening. 
We look forward to speaking and sharing some more and clarifying more for you, as the rest of the night goes on and then on monday, as well at seven o'clock. 
Did I my apologies. 
Let me go back. 
I 
I didn't realize that I think I got caught up in what we were saying about upk before, so my apologies. 
These are some additional details about our secondary return and again, with the utmost priority being the social and emotional well-being of our students. 
In grades. 
Six to eight we will be benchmarking for eli. 
We do that through a literacy management system that we have and also for math. 
All of our math departments have benchmarking type assessments that All of our math departments do in the beginning of the year and again this will be to identify present learning levels in grades, seven to 12 curriculum adjustments may be made for applicable areas where prior learning needs to be had so, for example, in our math and our science classes, there may need to be some learning from the prior year's regents bearing class, and so we would be looking to look at curriculum around that and possibly offer review classes for our students as well again, traditional grading will return. 
Students may not share, so we will be limiting textbook use 
and we'll be taking advantage of all of the online subscriptions that we have physical education again. 
Very much like elementary school will be a mix of the gym outside fields and other large area 
use instrumental lessons very similar to elementary. 
We are working with that department to ensure that lessons will occur. 
They do need to be 12 feet if They are wind and or choral in nature, and again we will be looking to figure out ways in order to still offer those choral groups, but in a modified version google classroom will continue to be utilized for communication with both the principal and the classroom teacher again for a seamless transition should we ever be ordered into distance learning. 
Lockers will mostly be used for am and pickup 
only that's not to say that if a student really needed to go back, we would not allow them to, but again just trying to minimize the flow and minimize how much our students are putting into the lockers. 
So we would envision some form of outerwear
, that's appropriate for that time and modified or or very. 
You know slight binders and or folders notebooks that they need stagger grades again in times of at the end of the period. 
We would be announcing grades so that they can come out into the hallways, so that would mean that we would be at the end of the period starting it a little bit earlier, so that we can allow each grade level to disperse into the hallway to their next period.
, sorry about that. 
So that still is the end of our presentation. 
We hope that this did clarify some further information for you. 
We are appreciative of the support and the time that the community offered We to be able to digest everything and wait for the orders, so We can bring this to you tonight. 
Thank you. 
Questions from the board questions from the board. 
Is anybody, jim, a john on the upk right now? 
The way that's funded is. 
Correct me. 
If I'm wrong, like a six hundred thousand dollar grant, primarily we get a six hundred thousand dollar grant. 
We hold a lottery that allots 252 families a spot in the program we have more interest than that annually, but families beyond the 253 are able to participate for the same rate, which is about twenty four hundred dollars per family for the year. 
So if, if the governor would give us 80 percent of that, that would mean that the district would have to come up with a hundred and twenty thousand dollars correct. 
But are you in that hundred twenty thousand dollars? 
Are we counting that that the lottery people are not paying tuition? 
That would still be the lottery people not paying right, so, in other words, the 120 000 could be reduced if the lottery people were willing to pay a tuition fee.
, that was a model the board chose to go with.
,, thank you just to figure back on what security was saying if they were to to to. 
Take twenty percent of that we'd be looking at about 479 thousand. 
Two hundred is what we'll be looking at, which is what accommodate 201 kids. 
You were saying that you were concerned that we, we might not be able to raise the funds to be able to. 
You know, manage the program and have enough you know what I mean. 
You'd have to redo the lottery. 
Then I I wouldn't I don't know. 
If would necessity, would you want to use the same number then cut the same number off?
, I set off at just 201 
and then and then open it up at 237.69 per per family per month. 
We could examine any model that the board wanted to take a look at. 
Certainly those other families had already been notified that they were among the families chosen for the free program. 
That's the worst. 
The worst case scenario would be correct, but let's say they take all the funding and, and they don't and one of the concerns to have it 
I mean have we thought about reaching out to some of our state elected officials, flanagan or doug smith, to find out if they can get us clarification from the governor's office as to whether or not he's going to fight, we can certainly continue to reach out. 
Quite honestly, during much of this crisis, much of them have been rather silent. 
we haven't been able to get a lot of information. 
the governor isn't sharing much with other people other than when the governor decides to put it out via press conference, I mean. 
Normally, our local representatives are very helpful in getting information for us. 
Unfortunately, hadn't been able to get information for us, but it's certainly worth trying. 
I mean us're two weeks before the start of school 
and you've got 252 families, not knowing whether or not 252 families have a pre-k. 
I mean I don't know, you know how the board feels, but 
I personally think that you would get 252 families, even if they took all 599 000, because at 237 a month for half day pre-k, it's still a great great opportunity sure- 
and I can't and now more than ever and and would be willing to work with us if there was zero funding 
and we had enough participation to still run the program. 
would can we include something like that in the survey sits some of the families out there to see what the interests would be. 
We could do a separate survey. 
I wouldn't want to you know not on the same survey. 
put it out as a separate survey, specifically targeted to those families that are already in the process. 
I have a follow-up to that. 
Where are we putting all these students if our classes are maxed out at this time we still have not reappropriated those classes. 
We do have a couple of buildings because of additional special education sections that we needed, that we moved the classes, but we have not taken away those class spaces. 
Yet so, if we were to go with the will of the board to you know, put out a survey and go with a tuition base, we would be you know all set to go: hi. 
I just had a quick question about the bus and what is the busing going to look like I mean again
, it'll also depend on participation. 
You know we put out a survey to the parents a week or so ago. 
I think we had nine thousand respondents in in very brief order. 
in that survey about a third of the families considered, possibly keeping their children home of the two-thirds willing to send their children children in 65 of those said their children would use the bus. 
The other 35 said their children would drive their children children to school. 
So just some quick, math you're only looking at say, 4 500, kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers. 
I mean they could change when we put out the new survey, and it could be that you know parents first stop that they don't want to use the bus and then during the year. 
Maybe they start. 
You know they need the bus. 
So we're not reducing the number of bus runs. 
All the runs that have been budgeted for would be running, but with those numbers you'd end up literally with just about one child per seat. 
You know so 
and then you also take into account 
remote you'll get routed for 44 students. 
So in the worst case scenario there could be two pupils in each seat, but based on the information we're receiving, I don't think there'll be that participation.
, just some clarification so with the custodial staff cleaning each night, so 
they're going to have more to do than they did prior. 
Have we increased the custodial staff since their job description will be different to do a more deeper cleaning every day daily versus. 
Unfortunately, that was one of the items that was pulled back on the budget, so obviously we may need to take a look at that again we were rating 10 custodians and then, when there was issues where we even today, we still don't know what our state funding is 
and we still have the potential of a looming. 
20 percent cut, we decided. 
If you remember back to january and february, we were talking about this. 
we were adding one extra custodian, each building right. 
That was one of we enhancements for this year's budget. 
we did draw that back, so we're going to work with the staff. 
we have work with the substitute staff we have, and you know it as best as possible to optimize cleaning, and then with the secondary schools, where you have the a b desks next to each other. 
So that means, if I am an a student and I sit in only the a 
and then the next day, the b desk comes in. 
That image might change, though I was going to say that that was really more so that we can show a visual to the families, how we were spacing it out in the beginning, 
those desks we would see needing to be reappropriated and put into our our lunchrooms different other areas where we're going to need to reappropriate other space, the library different items like that. 
So I don't. 
I don't necessarily think we were just at north today and in the classrooms that we walked around in with miss trombetta. 
There was only about 15 to 16 desks in in each classroom: 
okay. 
That was an initial setup when we were trying to figure out what it would look like or how we could divide them up. 
But in fact, with the style of cafeteria tables, we have it. 
it really prohibits the number of children that can eat in the cafeteria. 
We believe We're going to take all the cafeteria tables out of those secondary cafeterias and store them and put in desks. 
I mean it's not going to be the most attractive. 
Lunchroom it'll be set up more like a testing room where children will be spaced six feet apart right with classroom desks correct, but we do anticipate that we would be able to offer breaks, for you know, students to be able to go outside and go into any of the recreation areas, 
items like that elimination and so then in the secondary schools. 
If the kids are changing classrooms will the desk get wiped down between each change or how does that work in the cafeteria?,,, not in the classrooms that would that would technically be not possible. 
I mean there's 3 000 desks in high school and 1600 or so in in a middle school. 
That just wouldn't be the means in that four or five minutes of passing to wipe down those tables. 
But if we student would want to do their own destiny, the materials will be in the classroom right. 
We are providing that for every classroom. 
and then one last question., everybody! 
It's okay! 
If a staff or a student happens to test positive, that would then be reported, and then the cdc would guide us on what us had to do or us have us own plan. 
How does that work? 
The department of health, the department of health department of health? 
So The department of health, the department of health department of health would tell us so if it's one student in one classroom 
right that may be different than a student in a middle school who passes through a hall or mrs clayton's, become an expert on the matter.
, so the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require us to make reports for certain things and the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require the medical treatment provider. 
The doctor who's performed the diagnosis for a positive result to report information to reporting for contact tracing. 
So therefore, our obligation we go above and beyond to make sure that, even if, for some reason, the medical treatment provider has not contacted the contact tracing, we will just check you know belt and suspenders that we have provided some insight in case 
there's an instance. 
The other thing is when the lab results come back. 
the lab results are supposed to be also provided to the contact tracing, at which point the department of health would be or enter cdc would be contacting tracers and determining who they would contact, including students or staff or family or whoever they came into contact with. 
Can I can I pick you back on that question quick?, thank you very much so on the checklist that we do daily. 
Let's just say rob 
and I are in a classroom 
and I find out that he test positive for covid the next day when my parents are filling out the check sheet and it says, have you come in contact with anybody? 
That's tested positive? 
Will that prevent my entrance into the building? 
If you're saying you tested positive, if you're saying you're tested right?
, I mean, I'm, not gonna, tell you that rob testifies we're not allowed to tell you 
I mean I came to learn it. 
it becomes common knowledge of who it was, and now I have to honestly fill out the sheet 
I mean I'm have to now have to say.
, I did come into contact with some of the department of health guidelines for close contact, and this is where it gets a little squirrelly because you know, are we in close contact? 
Are we in close contact? 
Their criteria for close contact is less than six feet for 15 minutes or more, so we'll have to look at each of those one at a time, and I can foresee the department of health as soon as schools open, you know, becoming overwhelmed with calls from districts all around the state just trying to get feedback and answers, so we're building criteria and protocols with we nursing staff with we personnel staff. 
You know, so we can make some of these decisions on we own. 
We have handled situations already, even during summer school programs. 
So it's not that we're unfamiliar with how to do it. 
We've had staff members with with covid, so it's just going to be on a bigger scale. 
Now, that's all, and also just to mention, mr block is with us this evening from ingram and smith. 
He has been our one of our main contacts that we've been triaging information between the state, the federal, what we have in our schools, what we can do and what we can't do and trying to find the best scenario for our students and we staff 
and we'll continue to do so, and I promise this is my last question. 
So if a parent chooses the remote learning,, they have to commit to that for the year. 
they can't change they mind like after the first marking period, they're committing to that 
and then they student cannot participate in, let's say spring sports,, so, I think in in the beginning of the guidance, it said that students may not be able to may not be able to enter into activities or sports. 
We know now that that is not the case and that if a child is remote, they're still a student of ours, we're not really going to have any activities. 
So we don't foresee that being an issue. 
So it's really more for sports, but miss trombetta who sits on. 
The community. 
Four section has shared with us information in terms of how they're looking at that language and how we would not be prohibited most likely from keeping children back from sports in september, and then the child plays a spring sport and then come the spring. 
Sports are up and running and you tell the child they can't play, and just know that when we write that we're looking to make it more of a commitment that could be up to a year. 
That is because we don't want to give the misnomer that if a child says well, I want you know a family to say that they want to be remote in a week 
and then they change they mind. 
they want to do it another week. 
We will look at each case, but it would be very challenging for We to bring back large numbers of students who think who feel they might have made a poor choice, because that would shift all of our classrooms and all of our teaching staff.
, I would totally agree with that. 
I just didn't know if it would be like after every marking period reevaluated, but if the parent does commit, I just don't want to hurt the student of course by saying. 
If extracurricular comes back in spring, your parent made this choice in september, and now you can't participate right 
and I think for us, you know being just of mine- that things could shift very easily. 
We could look to look at that come january 
and it may not need to be a year-long commitment, but we did want to write it down so that parents were aware all right. 
Thank you very much. 
Thank you for sharing this with us. 
I have two questions or concerns. 
When this plan was developed to return to school k through five the ada b day, this plan wasn't based on surveys that went out as to the number of parents that think they would choose remote or not choose remote. 
It was based on our entire population.
, so conceivably, if we have a, a 6 through 12 model of a day b day, hypothetically every parent said, I want my kids to return to school. 
We can. 
We can accommodate all of them in an ajb day. 
You mean physically back into school.
, we wouldn't be able to do that. 
How would we physically bring them all back? 
We don't have so at the elementary level, just very simple, math. 
We have to take out about five to six, seven kids out of each classroom in order to be able to accommodate that average size. 
My question a little bit on the six through twelve model--,, it that was based upon returning every single child to school. 
So if friday, the survey is if we have if we have more children now I understand you. 
Thank you. 
So if we have more children who are going to be on remote, we could conceivably- 
and I know we discussed this this morning in we committee- 
we could look to bring back more students. 
My question is that my concern is the same as laura is having a one-year commitment. 
I received a half a dozen phone calls today,, probably in the last couple hours about I'm concerned about the one-year commitment we know.
, that you know in remote learning it says remote instruction is not equivalent to in-person hybrid instruction right
, so it's not the same level right so for forcing kids out of school. 
What we're doing is we're creating a bigger educational gap for the following year.
, we're not forcing that would be a parent's choice, but the thing is we allow them to come back after each quarter.
, if we're able to accommodate them according to the way the plan was designed. 
Why wouldn't we allow them come back after after one quarter, so them can get that? 
I didn't think we said that we wouldn't be allowing we said that it would be really prohibitive for we to be able to reschedule them back into classrooms, but we could look at it based on the numbers that we have. 
We wanted to be honest, mr scavo, and let families know that this could be a year-long commitment, and most districts are looking at that at either january or the year long, because it is very disruptive that would mean having to up just move around the entire schedule for. 
You know our schools, which we may still have to do, should covert restrictions be lifted, but you wouldn't want to recant, and we know that that happened quite a bit where, in the beginning of all this debacle, we were putting out information 
and then something you know, alternatively, was shared, but I think we just said before with miss slattery, that, of course, if we could look at it by quarter and we felt like it wasn't going to be a tremendous feat for our families that we would do that. 
But I think that that's not probably what a parent is going to make their choice on if I'm choosing to be remote. 
It's because I'm thinking that it's unsafe for my child to be at school. 
So I'm hoping that by these presentation, slides that we have 
people will see that we've made tremendous tremendous. 
You know strides in making sure that our schools are safe, our schools're, clean 
and we're doing routine protocols to ensure that, but the commitment is a year. 
That's what this time for right! 
Now!
, so if something changes at home a person, that's furloughed now has to go back to work right, they want to and they they impression is going to be that they can't return because they signed the paper saying that they have a one-year commitment to be at. 
But I mean I think, though if, if there's something along those lines- 
and we all get those calls all the time, if there's a family, that really is in enough need and feels like they made the poor choice or not a poor choice. 
they made the wrong choice for what they they thing is. 
Going on right now, so whether a parent goes back, furloughed or they child is just not doing well in remote learning and they were to contact us just like any other parent phone call that we would have. 
Of course, we would look at every case individually, but I'm talking as a whole. 
We could not say you're going to be a remote 
and then, if you choose to decide in masses that you want to come back, We just would not be able to run the same schedule 
and then We would be restarting everything over again. 
The reason why I bring this up is: I watched the the newsday webinar yesterday we had dr johnson. 
I finally heard all about johnson. 
I got a chance to see johnson in the presentation, along with a psychiatrist along with a the superintendent of north babylon, and that exact question came up right and a lot of the experts were saying. 
I would not go past a semester. 
In fact, a lot of districts are going quarterly, you know- 
and I just don't. 
I just don't want to influence a person's decision because they're fearful that, if they sign that paper they're not going to be able to come back because the reality of it is
, is that you know when we look at the education of even a day b day. 
My concern is that, as a teacher, you can't teach the entire curriculum and now we're talking about prior learning being re-taught from the previous year, how you and you're never going to be able to teach the the entire curriculum, but the kids that at home that are not getting the same. 
Equivalency of education are going to be further behind the following year and which all we're going to do is create a a snowball effect and that's my concern. 
I mean you know I personally would like you know the opportunity that, if they, if they come back after, if they're the first quarter, which is a 10-week period or nine-week period, I think it would be a little more settling for the people in the community. 
Knowing that all right, this remote's not learning I committed to a year now, I'm stuck well
, I mean, I think I think two things right, because I agree with you. 
I don't think anybody wants to be in the position where we can't welcome back students interchangeably as students need, and we definitely know that, no matter what happens. 
Curriculum is going to be interrupted this year. 
That is a safe bet, but if we play, if it's the will of the board, if it's the will of the board to change that- 
and you would like to make that language more flexible, we're happy to do that. 
But know that we've taken, you know quite a concealed amount of time to making sure we would prefer we students not to be on remote, but if a family really chooses and needs to choose that we honor and we respect that absolutely. 
But, I mean nobody wants to do that, but nobody's the size of sagem either, and so we have different restrictions. 
That's why the question was the plan design based on the entire it was. 
It was based on of if all students were going to be a full return, then we would have to go in an a b day if we are finding, though, that we have remote students at a quantity where we can bring back students even an additional day or or by grade level seniors. 
First, ninth graders. 
First, you know. 
However, we look to plan through that. 
Then that's would be our next step. 
So just what we were saying earlier in we remote instruction, it's going to be hard to match up what exactly the model will look like until we have the survey results from our teachers and for our families, so we can match it up certification-wise. 
My biggest concern is we have kids taking ap exams and getting those kids ready for that and getting those kids ready for the next level college. 
You know we. 
We have training as much face time with with staff. 
It's absolutely. 
I agree with you 
and I'm very 
I'm very thankful. 
You know working with the scta if we ever have to think about distance learning the fact that we'll be providing two and a half hours every day for our students so running the same schedule, just shortened periods. 
You know working on google classroom interchangeably now and consistently across all of our classrooms. 
You know just right now. 
Currently we have a tremendous amount of teachers that are undergoing pd, virtually to ensure that everything is is up and running and that they feel clarified and supported in that kind of work, but you're preaching to the choir. 
I couldn't agree with you more that this is a really challenging time. 
I have a high schooler myself 
and she's in a smaller district, doing an a b schedule. 
So I scratch my head a lot right now, so I I completely respect and understand and if the board would like us to look at the year-long date, just let us know and us'd be happy to accommodate.
, this this will go the, remote learning actually just went out. 
That survey just went out, but us 
can I mean I could send it on on. 
On remind in five minutes, if us wanted to say you know that us've changed the date, but it sounds like. 
Maybe that needs to be more of a discussion if we're looking to go that route meredith engine and then jimmy so on the remote learning. 
If a parent were to choose that model, I understand that we would want them to commit for the full year, because we are devoting staff just to that remote learning we're not using a teacher who may be inside the classroom, sometimes we're going to utilize the staff that, for whatever reason, has to be staying at home to be our remote teachers. 
That's the optimal plan, so at the elementary level, it works a little bit easier in that in that fashion. 
If I'm an elementary teacher and I'm out, I can conceivably teach any of those grade levels 
if I'm a librarian, obviously that certification, et cetera et cetera, it gets a little trickier at the secondary level, because if I'm a chemistry, teacher 
and 
and I'm out- 
and maybe I don't have as many students out for chemistry- 
you know- 
then what am I giving to that teacher in terms of work that they would be doing for that day. 
So one could say that she would switch what they're doing 
and now they're going to teach more science electives and they can support any of those students who are out needing science electives. 
So it's really going to boil down to looking at the hard numbers of students matched up with the teachers that we have. 
Should we not be able to match everybody up which 
I'm hopeful we will be able to, then we would need to start entering into some sort of live streaming or larger groups of google classrooms, where a teacher, instead of having a class of maybe 25 or 26 in a google classroom, we may have to have larger numbers, and 
so then that's why the year-long decision, or not doing it every quarter becomes very challenging for us. 
If I'm a teacher 
and I'm running a google classroom of 45 kids and 
now some that those classrooms want to go back
, what classroom are they going into? 
Where am I fitting they into 
so then you're having to change people's schedule? 
It's a lot of moving parts, it is and then, if, so we have 
so children are able to through children parents, choose whether children want to come back to school or not. 
Our teachers are not electing whether Our teachers're coming back to school. 
The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning are the teachers that have reasons why The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning cannot return, and so, even if tomorrow, you know three weeks after school started, all of our remote learners said well. 
This is for the birds. 
I don't like this. 
I want to go back to school. 
We wouldn't then have the ability to bring them back, because, even though We did the classrooms for them, We wouldn't at that point, have the ability. 
Would we not at this time, because again, with six feet, we are, you know down to the amount of numbers that we have, 
but if, if our numbers look as such, where the remote learning is a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms, let's say, for example, instead of them being 17, that might only be 13 or 14. 
So then we could start welcoming them back, but that would be based on almost you know, looking at each student individually and being able to see how we can schedule them back into school, which is probably a very physical impossibility in the next three weeks. 
It's a little hard with our secondary schools as a as a secondary mom. 
It is it it kind of does stink 
and there's no two ways about it: our children, no child, is going to get the best education this year. 
It's just not going to happen and something we're going to try we best 
we'll. 
Definitely try our best right. 
If one, let's say somerset had an influx of you know. 
80 percent of their kids wanted to stay home and remote learn that would open up a lot more room, but it wouldn't necessarily mean that we would do somerset where their children win every single day and the rest of their., we would be making decisions that are consistent for all students, but then we might be reappropriating staff to help out in other ways in other areas, and I don't want to put you on the spot, but it's okay. 
That's why we're here 
we're on the spot? 
Have we looked into sixth grade at all, because in my opinion sixth grade is that lost grade? 
It's a grade where they're a little too young to still stay home by they and not only just stay home for the day by they, but also teach they kind of you know get on this get on the schedule 
get on the computer. 
Do what you got to do? 
Keep yourself moving on that b day. 
Have we visited something that once we get all our numbers, because I know we can't really finalize anything until we get all these surveys and numbers, but once we get all those numbers, are we going to be able to maybe look at sixth grade going every day as a possibility?
, that's absolutely you know
, that's definitely a conversation that we've been having as as soon as we know what the numbers are. 
Will we be able to welcome back additional grades, and I would I would assume that we would be having these conversations with with all of you, our administrative team, obviously as well and sixth grade is one of those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off at, because we know that they could be 10 11 years old going into school, and I would not feel comfortable myself at times, leaving my child home for long periods,, and so, we've had those conversations and once we know the numbers we'll be able to come back and report if we're able to make any changes good. 
Thank you. 
So much, no problem, just a quick question. 
Some clarification!, piggybacking a little bit on what mr scavo said. 
Are we entering the year making an assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver 100 of content in regards to secondary curriculum? 
If that is the assumption that I think you said that we're almost entering into, I mean who's going to choose what topics and what's being covered. 
Are we letting different teachers different people it just it concerns me that we're entering, 
I know, there's no perfect answer and there's no scenario that can right that, under these circumstances that you've, given you 
but. 
I guess that makes more of mr scala's point is that if we're making the assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver content, we should be trying to wait till so many surveys come back and see how many kids we can actually get 
and. 
So right, I don't have a perfect answer for it, but I can tell you what we're doing to set up for that. 
I had a chair meeting a couple of weeks ago, so our instructional leaders in each department to talk about that, especially at the secondary level, and so we would be looking at our curriculum at what are the big ideas at the end of the school year. 
What is it that the students are expected to learn so the students can. 
You know move forward and pass those classes and or regence exams, we're also hoping to have a little bit more guidance in terms of the state education department in terms of what they're going to do in relaxing standards and curriculum and testing so much in how they had canceled the regents. 
We don't hope for that. 
We hope more for choice so that these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents. 
If they want to take it and see what kind of grade they get, I don't, I don't think we're looking. 
I don't think- 
and I know 
you mean it this way, but we're not assuming we're not going to be able to get through we curriculum, but we want to be real with we families. 
our curriculum could look a little bit different than what our curriculum normally does, and I know our teachers again hard workers are already looking at that. 
We've had some conversation, for example around science lab hours, usually that's seat time 
now the state education department has relaxed that, and that could be also a virtual. 
So we've already started those conversations once we come back into. 
Schools in our department means that we've been having anyway, virtually we'll continue those talks and start looking at that together. 
So this at the secondary level state the new york state, creates the standards for apn regions 
right so haven't. 
Given us clarification, okay, is through is through the college board, and so us actually are, starting, as you know, a new ap capstone program at the high school, so those teachers that are gonna begin teaching it for us this year they just went through the training for that 
and right now, ap is holding tight to what they're doing, but we also know that at the last minute they made some changes around what they did: testing wise, virtually. 
So we are advocating- 
and I think mr o'keefe spoke about this earlier- while we have not heard a tremendous amount from our legislators at this time we have been advocating, through we local boces, our associations talking to talking to the college board and just hoping for some teamwork for relief, so that families know that you know we're not looking to make any decisions that are going to make impacts for the students, but we also have to be real and they have to work with we. 
So we're hopeful for that. 
No problem, aaron, the so by the weekend we will have the figures on how many people are opting for remote learning. 
Is that,, 
all and the way we have it now is they're being committed. 
they can make a commitment for one full year, just just for my identification. 
Let's suppose it came back to say 30 percent of our district, one, which could be right, which could be what it could be sure. 
What does that change? 
Anything for us with the ab days or or or as meredith said, the sixth grade situation would, let's say, 30 remote for the year. 
Would that change? 
You know what we're doing right now.
, absolutely so what I just said with business. 
Also gonna take you know. 
Where is the thirty percent? 
It could be heavily weighted on the younger children.
, you know, is a k12 pet families deciding they want to keep them home right. 
You know it really depends on the breakdown of the of the groupings and the grades of where that 30 percent is or is it leaning more on one side of the district versus the other, it's not as clean as just if it was thirty percent, but, spaced across the district. 
That would make it easier. 
We can see some movement, I'm just not sure that I could say for sure right now that it would be at the secondary level. 
We would just need to see where it is and just aggregate that and just look at it, and it also boils down to to you know certification areas too, as well. 
How much staff we have in in each area? 
I fully understand mr scala's position on that. 
I really do understand, but I'm trying to trying to look at this, as if you put out a survey tonight which is already gone, but if you put it out- 
and it said your one mocking period 
and you could change your mind, then kind of I would say that you really 
we're stuck with what we've got this is. 
This is the way it's got to be because you don't know from market period of marketing period, how many students you're going to have. 
Is that accurate? 
I mean, 
but, but that goes to back to what we said. 
we can't put out there that you can make the decision after each quarter. 
If we're not sure we're going to be able to offer that- 
and so I know it may have looked like it- was a little bit stricter than it sounds like the board was- was willing to move forward with 
and so again we're certainly open to putting in alternate language, and we could send it as as quick as you know, as soon as we're done here or first thing in the morning. 
I certainly don't want to prohibit anybody from not doing remote learning but again, it's it's. 
We have to be practical in the size of our school district, so we can't say We're going to be able to offer things that smaller school districts can right away, but it is prohibitive based on on the numbers. 
So,, we might be able to offer that and we might be able to offer more grades into our secondary schools. 
We might be able to offer more space for our elementary students. 
We just won't know until We see all of those numbers getting to getting that number that we're seeking this weekend will drive where we go next,, and that's why it's challenging to be able to share with we staff and 
with our community what remote learning will you know essentially look like as well? 
If I don't have enough staff, I can't guarantee that you're going to be in a google classroom with a live teacher. 
I might not be able to offer that it may be based on whatever elective or store or grade that you're in it could be some sort of like a live streaming, but 
but again it really. 
It depends on on the numbers of the students that we have up against we staff as well. 
Thank you, jim just just real fast to pick it back. 
I apologize. 
I walked out for a second, if only 75 of the families respond to the survey. 
So now there's 25 of the kids. 
We don't know what they're doing no the default is that they're coming to school.,! 
Thank you no problem, so I know with elementary the teachers. 
Usually take their lunch when the students have their lunch. 
How are we working that, if they're having a lunch in the classroom who will be supervising they so? 
We do have obviously aid support. 
We are also working with We principals because We know that We're probably going to need some additional help with that, but We also know that. 
You know that lunch is managed. 
I actually thought that there was some staff that was a part of the lunch periods that might be mistaken. 
I'd have to look at that, but We are. 
We are having conversation to ensure that We have the support We need for lunch, two more. 
Actually. 
What will clubs look like virtually? 
So that's 
that's another new and exciting question 
right. 
We definitely know that clubs are not going to be able to be maintained after school physically. 
We have started to work with an online platform called passport for good and it allows clubs to run virtually and note on all their activities attendance community service hours if a child is working any of those types of hours. 
So we have to enter into conversation with our teachers about what that could look like. 
we certainly don't want to not offer clubs, but you know once a week twice a week: what sort of activities? 
How will you meet with them? 
Will google me be a part of it? 
Those are the questions that we're looking to have moving forward around clubs and one more with the staggered start times. 
Those are students still changing for gym class. 
We will not be changing for gym and We will not need to because We have moved team sports to the end and we're looking to do more. 
You know personal fitness that isn't rigorous, but we would not. 
We would not be looking to have any any. 
You know contact in that manner for our students 
[Music]. As I sat here tonight. 
I thought about saying absolutely nothing 
and I really don't know where to begin. 
I don't have a specific question. 
I can tell you that I'm incredibly angry internally right now 
and it's not at anybody in this room, but 
I thought that, I haven't organized my thoughts completely they're. 
Just bouncing around in my head, but I want to say a few things. 
First, I want to say that you did an outstanding job in the most difficult of circumstances. 
You've put together a plan. 
Every school district is in the same exact boat that we are in questions asked tonight by rob, alex laura meredith everybody here great questions, and we don't have the answers to any of those questions and we are going to be surprised. 
I think greatly by the things that we find. 
I think that you know people could look at what's going on here tonight and 
people may think that all of us agree on this model and think that this is what we have to do. 
I'm sure there are people watching this tonight streaming or 
we'll watch it later on 
and they'll think that if you're sitting here, I'm sitting here 
and I'm quiet that I must agree with this plan- 
and I think it's wonderful 
and I'm going to tell you that I do
n't it's rotten, it's a rotten plan. 
That's going to do tremendous damage to our children. 
I've been teaching for over 22 years. 
Now I can remember when I started there was goals 2000., maybe some people in the room. 
Remember that maybe you don't, then there was no child left behind and then most recently there was common core there's, never a time in which it seems like a bad idea, 
can't come about a bunch of garbage and nonsense that does anything but improves the education of our children. 
As I sat here tonight and I watch that slideshow 
and I watch those desks sitting so far apart. 
I thought what kind of dystopian period of time have we entered into where we look at this, and we accept this as the quote-unquote, what I hate to say the new normal, it's not normal to me. 
It's not acceptable to me. 
I want you to know that if it were up to me solely, I would defy the governor. 
I would send all of our children back to back to school. 
I would give all of our children that opportunity. 
I believe that his edicts are completely unrealistic in terms of delivering a sound education to our children and I believe they are not well-based in terms of research and data and so on. 
So when we look at how many children have ended up with covid and what's happened to how many children, there's no question that covet exists. 
In my mind, I lost one friend to it. 
I almost lost a second several who had it very badly who thought they might lose they lives. 
So there's no question that covet exists. 
However, when I look at the numbers and when I look at children getting covered, what I see is that our response is disproportionate to what is going on and we are willing to just fall in line and listen to the leadership of this state, this country and do these things- 
and I know there are people who feel like me, and I know there are people who don't feel like me, a third of the survey respondents who have said I'm not comfortable sending my child to school, and I am all about parental choice. 
If you do not feel comfortable sending your child to school, then I encourage you not to I encourage you to homeschool. 
I encourage you to use the remote option if you're not comfortable with that. 
However, I feel, like I've, been denied my choice, which is to send my child to school. 
I'm willing to tolerate that risk based upon what I know, because I think that the damage being done to my child that still is in in school and the damage being done to other children is tremendous. 
I taught remotely for the last what three four months of school 
and when I tell you that I did as good of a job as anyone could do with live instruction every single day. 
All right. 
I worked very hard to do what I did and I watched kids slide into the great abyss and some of those children that I watched slide are supposed to go off. 
The princeton this fall are supposed to go to. 
Cornell are supposed to go to. 
You know you name the school 
and 
and they're going columbia and so on. 
But yet I've watched each one of they slip 
and I've watched a few hold on, 
and I've watched the most needy students that I taught completely slip
, we're not getting that back. 
we are not, and here we are and here's where we're going 
so I'll leave on this particular note. 
Sometimes it's real easy to just go along 
and I feel terrible for people like you, folks, the administration here
, it's simple and I'm in the same boat as an educator. 
It's my job! 
It's how I support my family and live my life and as a result of that, I'm forced to comply, because if I don't I'm out of a job but the solutions, we've come up with they're, not good solutions, they're, terrible solutions, and they are solutions that are going to harm each and every one of our children. 
And at some point I do believe that people who feel the way that I feel are going to have to think long and hard about how we stand up and demand what we want for we children that we think is best. 
I just want to say before I ask my last two questions that was well said bill. 
I I feel exactly the same. 
we do so well said. 
I just want to talk about the boces, because we're also feeling some questions today about boces. 
As I mentioned earlier in the meeting community meeting where there was only 50 people in that meeting,, where there was only 50 people, there was 50 how many people 50 volunteers 
and then all of our staff as well go ahead.
, you know. 
Having worked for boces for going into my 29th year, you know over the decades things change school districts go to block schedule. 
Kings park did at one point: school districts for financial purposes, decided that you know we don't want to send two bus routes to boces. 
we only want to have one route and, as a result,, they basically said to we agency look whirly standing in the am this year, or will he sending seniors in the am and juniors in the pm and they've changed things so that it accommodated he and our bosses always accommodated he and my concern with some of the questions with some of the students that are in cte classes, that are that are scheduled to go to carpentry and auto body, and- 
and you know whatever other programs they signed up for- is that transportation becomes an issue if we have an a day b day, those particular subject areas you have to be there every day you can't teach somebody how to sand the fender and paint the fender remotely. 
It's just not something that can happen, so I suggested earlier that maybe we should call boces, eastern south post and say look we pay anywhere from 14 to 20 000 tuition depending on the particular student. 
If they have an iep or not or if they need additional services, we can only stand in the am because of the situation. 
We're in you know and get their feedback. 
You know, I don't believe We. 
I don't think they want to lose the tuition.
, I agree and and uh- 
and you know I did appreciate that idea, because I'm not I 
I know you're in western 
but it was just you know, shared with us, the model that they were running, 
and so we traditionally we're share 
we're told what we schedule is, but we are quite large and I agree with you- 
we pay an exorbitant amount of money into both season. 
It's certainly worth the conversation. 
The second thing we have in-house cte classes where we have cosmetology, and you know using the same concept- 
I mean if we have to get we kids there every single day. 
The suggestion that you know we've we've done in you know boces is that we try to allocate you know: 
the junior students first year, students 
the am session this way they could take that bus up every single day right and just have to get a ride home two two days out of the week 
and then the pm students or the second year. 
Students would actually attend cosmetology and pm because many of Students may have driver's license and license. 
It's just another suggestion to be able to accommodate that population of kids. 
That really need to be there five days a week, especially cosmetology students that have licensing and all that stuff which, by the way our cosmetology teacher, I mean she. 
she really just went above and beyond to ensure that the kids had the experience the kids needed, even if it was virtually. 
So I agree with you 
and I do appreciate that feedback 
and then just the last thing is more of a more of a comment 
and it's frustrating because I I hear what bill saying I hear 
and if you don't mind, I really do. 
Mr coggins, I. 
I don't want you to think or anybody to think that we just you know, laid low because of we jobs.. 
I think everybody knows I came from a district where we stood very tall against things that were coming down from the state education department. 
I think when you're talking about health, it's a little bit challenging, but I hope you understand- 
and I hope everyone in the community knows that at no point did. 
I think that I was doing this just because it was my job 
but because I really do want what's best for children like. 
I know all of us here, but I stand just as equally frustrated when you're out and you see people out and about in playgrounds and beaches and and whatnot 
and we're held to you know very different standards. 
But when I tell you that we're working 18, 19 20 hours to make sure we're given the best, I know it's not what we all want, but I do respect what you said 
and I really do appreciate that feedback. 
My last thing is really more of a statement and. 
You know when I look at the guidelines for opening in new york and it seems like they print a new one every week, because they change the rules so crazy,. 
You know you look at they. 
If I can say that you know john, when you said it was cryptic, it really is 
I mean you need to you know you can interpret this 50 differently.
,, but they have a mandatory column and then recommendations for best practices, which I don't understand, but it talks about ensure that social distancing, six feet at least six feet or a physical barrier is maintained between individuals while in school facilities on school grounds, including cafeterias, unless safety or care of activities such as moving equipment or elevating elevators traveling in common areas requires shorter distance of individuals. 
But then number two says: if social distancing is not possible, individuals must wear acceptable face governments
, that's exactly how we interpret what we talked about earlier if we have to move kids back into a classroom. 
The way I interpret this- and maybe legal legal counsel, give me you know 
The way I interpret this- 
and maybe legal legal counsel opinion right is that if we had to move desks closer together, to be able to not be able to, you know, accommodate the social distancing by putting masks on the kids, we would be able to do that 
and that's exactly how we started out we planning. 
If you remember we had looked at, I think it was the massachusetts model where we were looking to at least go no less than three feet 
and when we did that it was like everyone's high fiving each other everyone's coming back. 
This is great and I don't mean to put mr block on the spot, but we did receive guidance from legal and it looked as though that masks were not going to be appropriate alone, but we read the regulations the same as you. 
It was just as disappointing when we found out that was not to be mr o'keefe. 
The other day, you'd mention that if we were able to go three feet, we could accommodate every student. 
Every kid come back. 
Every student we had every building make up a class for three feet, and so we were able to say that if parents felt safe for parents children to return that we were able to do that we hands are very tied. 
In terms of that, and you know again, I don't mean to put you on the spot, mr black, but you may want to jump in then 
it was a few weeks ago where you know we thought that just mask face covering was going to be sufficient. 
If you couldn't maintain the social distancing, but then the governor's office came out and clarified that and said that you have to have that physical barrier and. 
So that then took away we what we thought was we ability to have face masks, but the face coverings are okay in the hallways and the bus.
,,, there's!! 
It's not that's!, nothing makes sense, but that is. 
That's 
that's what we're following so aaron. 
As we all know, I should have had a swivel chair, john I'm just saying. 
Should I have a swivel chair, as we all know, education is is not going to be pretty this year and we want to give we children as much as we can 
and we've spent so many years working on this educating the whole child and worrying about social, emotional. 
I'm, the most emotional person shouldn't be talking about this, 
but. 
So a couple of things, our most vulnerable, social and emotional. 
As we see little children adapt much better. 
You see a two-year-old in target with a mask on it's, not a problem.
, my teenagers find the mask, uncomfortable and, and so hours. 
Six through 12, in my opinion, are our most mentally vulnerable 
and I just feel like, because things are so different. 
Are they going to be able to just go down to the guidance counselor just go down to you know, or things like that like, where they want to just go. 
Take five minutes with the guidance counselor or even the school psychologist. 
Is that still going to be fully in place opened to everyone? 
Is there also? 
I know that. 
I know that over the the distance learning period last year that our sagem north sel chairs they 
they did a tremendous job. 
Having a google meet also are are things for mental health in place 
and then my other question is what does recess look like in in covid land in elementary? 
I think, because I think I lightly brushed over that. 
So I'm glad that you asked me about that because you know so last year was the big thing that we were taking away: five minutes from lunch and recess 
and uh, there's always bigger fish to fry people. 
So, with that they're gonna be allowed to go outside 
they're gonna be allowed to run it all off. 
Are they allowed to play on the play gyms? 
Are they allowed to play ball with one another, or is it you're going to stay there and just run in place 
and you're going to stay there and run in place 
and? 
I mean, I think. 
Realistically they are children
, we're going to do we best to set up so that it's a safe environment, but there's not going to be boredoms out there if they are playing ball. 
I can't tell you that we will they're going to be, as I said earlier, rotating between the fields that we have the playground equipment that we have and then the basketball courts, so we would obviously have equipment outside for that. 
we do have sanitizing stations that we will be utilizing for the students but again. 
You know, as I said I think in the beginning. 
we do not want we students to come back feeling like we're in jail, and the first thing that we had on we slides was the social, emotional well-being of our students 
and I'm very proud of the program that we have built here, and we are just looking for unique ways whether it be virtual, more push in from we sel chairs. 
You know all project kindness, all of those things we'll still have all of those things this year. 
all of those things just may look a little bit different in terms of the mental health staff, ms graham and the office of student services. 
Now under the direction of mram better with ms graham, we will be deploying guidance counselor. 
All of those different all of those services are still in place, but we see we doing more proactive lessons as students come in and more push in into our classrooms, so that students feel comfortable. 
We know the issues that we're seeing out there again. 
Our sel chairs have sent out a survey to our students at the secondary level, and I agree with you at the elementary level we're going to be doing more proactive, resiliency skill type of activities with them. 
Our health teachers for the past year have been building a health workbook for the elementary schools that are rooted in all the resiliency skills that we have been studying using the university of pennsylvania. 
So we're really excited about what we can deploy for we students, and you know it goes back to
, we are so worried about curriculum and we are we are. 
we are going to work to ensure that all big ideas as much as we possibly can until this is all over is taught, but we first charge is just making sure that those kids feel happy and safe and healthy coming in and we staff as well. 
we staff has not only been teaching from home prior to the summer, but Our staff also had Our staff own issues that 
Our staff may have been you know undergoing. 
So that is our number one goal here. 
Thank you no problem, mr keith. 
Mr science.. 
One of the important questions that was asked this morning was about safety and about how kids are wearing kids masks on the bus they're getting off the bus 
and now they're walking into the building with 
they masks on maybe a hood on
, maybe a hat on and 
they're not going to be as easily identifiable as they have in the past. 
One of the suggestions was to wear lanyards with maybe id cards. 
I'm just wondering what else. 
If there's any other suggestions, if there's, how are we gonna, I mean? 
Obviously health and safety is number one concern that that is a that is a major concern of not being able to recognize kids and especially, ninth graders, who are now new to the building. 
So we don't know any of them to begin with, and and sixth graders are now going in there right. 
So there's going to be a lot of unfamiliar faces and even more unfamiliar with me.
, so not too unfamiliar only because we do have 
we transition meetings for all fifth graders going into the sixth grade and then all eighth graders going into the ninth grade, and we did those virtually over the past few months prior to the ending of school. 
So all teams at the high school level, in conjunction with their middle school and then middle school to elementary school. 
We met on every single student, not just some, but all so they were able to physically see a picture of the student talk about the student all of those things, so so We're hoping right that there are similar, some familiar faces coming in 
but, like We had talked about this morning, the use of the student badges. 
We have never truly enforced the way that we need to now, but We would have to ensure that the students are maintaining that and showing that because the students will be wearing masks as the students come in. 
However, We are also spacing things out, so the kids aren't coming into school in mass quantities, so should, in fact you know, prior to all the badges coming out. 
You need to slip down just so. 
We can kind of recognize you put back up and go back in. 
I think We would feel safe and comfortable in terms of that, but We'll be working with We staff working with security and seeing what other measures that we can, you know put into place. 
John. 
I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that. 
Just to pick it back up. 
If we're going to have the kids wear their id cards just a matter of how fast can we get the idea?? 
That's the 
that's the only thing, 
and that's why I say in the beginning. 
We may just have to do the old-fashioned, put it down for a second, so I can see, but you know 
We staff is pretty astute and granted the ninth graders. 
We may not recognize them all, but we all you know. 
We know our students here 
so, that's obviously 
another concern would be now 
We have them wearing them id cards and of course, we all know that 10 to 15 of the kids are either going to lose the kids or forget the kids. 
Do we have a mechanism to reprint them in the building daily so that everybody has one? 
Thank you,, so just for the community, we we are able to duplicate that., thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss any other questions we moved on. 
I just wanted to make sure that we at least took a poll of where we stand. 
As on remote learning, did we want to take a poll and leave a poll at one full year of a commitment? 
Did we want to talk about a half year? 
Did we want to talk about a quarter? 
I think it's important that we do it now, so that we don't wait until last. 
Second 
and we're changing[Music]. 
I understand what rob was saying before about this. 
I'm just curious why it wouldn't be sufficient if we just changed the language to where we could evaluate if it were possible and had people understand that it could potentially be that long, but we could, of course, if situations allow we can, we can, we can shorten it and truncate the time period. 
Can I just ask a question to mr block: 
I mean 
I just just because I can foresee 
I'm sorry jim just because I can foresee something are 
we are 
we even legally allowed to tell somebody they're not allowed to come back? 
That's 
you know, that's a 
that's an unanswered question. 
You know 
and it's unprecedented from a legal standpoint, and 
you know I understand fully the operational issues from a legal standpoint. 
You're going to want to see more flexibility, because the concern is that family will say that being denied. 
My right education, it responds back, is no you're being educated, being educated remotely, but that's not the same type of education as an in-person education. 
So from a legal standpoint, I would recommend that there be some flexibility built in. 
I was actually going to state that if you were going to do that, still keep the year, but have a reevaluation the ability to be able to re-evaluate, as ms heinz said, that that's going to occur on a student-by-student basis.
, if there's a concern from a parent, but parents are maybe being a little bit, not almost misled, but don't not aware of the fact that there may be a re-evaluation, but that's something you may want to clarify, and you could do it in an interval period. 
You could do it. 
You know after the first quarter,, that's as a re-evaluation, for example. 
I mean. 
One of my concerns would be is that they realize what remote learning entails and they're 
I. This is not what I signed up for we're not going live, we're not doing this or not right, and then we get an influx of kids and now class sizes grow and we don't have the space to have everybody in. 
So I just I want to make sure that we have that flexibility
, I'm sorry jim 
[Music]., my position is 
I like what bill just said. 
My position was to get the true figures. 
The way it went out was probably the right way to go, so people aren't saying.
, I can experiment for a while and we never really get a true picture, but at the same time I think if you put it if the language was softened up to say, the possibility of a full year is real. 
However, you know there's going to be, independent cases that have changed, etc, etc. 
So we all know that we all know that this could all change, but to get the true figure up front. 
I think they have to be aware that this could be a full year of remote learning.., that's just my opinion. 
and I apologize. 
I don't have the survey in front of me. 
I don't, 
I think I said could be, but I don't recall, but we could certainly again put that out once we see the numbers and 
if, in fact we feel like, maybe families felt a little bit, it was too strong and families're, not really quite sure we can. 
We could send a call out. 
We could send out an email as quick as you know now, if We wanted to the reason why I asked that question is: is that we based that plan on every single student returning?
, We did so the issue is not space. 
The issue is scheduling.
, that's correct right!
, so I view it as well and and because of the six feet right, you know obviously space because of that, but the six feet parameters is what allowed us to go to this plane to accommodate every kid. 
They should be right. 
So if we don't have all if, if not all kids return, then we will have more space, obviously and then can bring back more kids. 
So so the thing is like I said: the issue is not the space matter. 
You know the plan was devised based upon every single student returning and that's why I suggested you know, maybe doing the plan 
once you know one or four times a year. 
You know. 
For that reason, I understand that it could be a nightmare scheduling. 
if the restrictions aren't lifted, I guess we have 13 kids. 
In a seventh grade, honest math class and we're looking at a schedule, you're going to look at the section 
say all right put them in mrs smith's class or put them in correct.
, so you know the issue is that you have this. 
You have the space, it's just more of a scheduling thing, and I would imagine that if more and more kids come back from remote learning, we could reassign teachers to classrooms.
,, and- 
and that's the point so in a year where we're already saying the curriculum's interrupted the day has been corrupted. 
That's the only thing that we wanted to minimize in the beginning and get a true account, because you don't want to be moving teachers around and upheaving schedules, but we can of course always hand select 
and. 
You know put students in as outliers who really do need to come back, but we didn't want to forget. 
I don't know who said it before. 
we just didn't want people thinking, I'm going to try it out for a week 
and if I don't like it 
I'll, go because we're just. 
That would be really good. 
A quarter you know, and that will give us enough time to do the planning and do the scheduling if we have, if we had to. 
I just think that the one year signing something this is one year, scaring heck out of people based upon the phone calls that I received today. 
So I guess we'll have to then decide. 
Are we doing flexibility? 
The flexible option, obviously is the best for everybody, but do we want to say one year or do we want to say by quarter, 
and I guess we'll vote on that. 
So if you want to do a full year, write it with flexibility, you can vote on that full year. 
Flexibility,, so just put we'll put we hands up 
and I'll 
just we'll count them all full year with flexibility or flexibility with re-evaluating every quarter.
, so, but maybe we could put what would be the best way to well. 
I think that what I suggested would be if you want to stay with the full year, but that you re-evaluate on a quarterly basis, because I just caution us to if we all of a sudden say flexibility, then people, you know 
I 
just we have to have a true account. 
School starts in two and a half weeks, and I I don't mean to be crafts about that, but we we really do, 
and so I think, mr black, the way that you had said it. 
I think you know it's a year, but we would be reevaluating it throughout the year for everybody. 
I 
I 
I like what he said. 
Does that mean?? 
I don't think that you're going to make that full commitment. 
I don't think you can quite frankly. 
So I think that the concern was being raised was that parents, under the impression that you know no matter what I do 
it's a year now
, if I commit it's a full year, that's not going to be the case. 
We're going to look at it on a quarterly basis. 
Again, it's change. 
There could be 
a week wake up tomorrow with an executive order which states that parents, you know, can make the choice on daily basis. 
You know so you know, so I. 
I think that what it's going to be is that the district will look at it. 
We're going to look at We operational needs, We're going to look at the parental needs and make you know an informed decision, but that the benchmark be on a quarterly basis. 
Would it help if we provided some sample language 
and then you're able to let us know if that language looks appropriate, because we can send that out. 
You know as quick as. 
You know sunday evening or monday morning for folks perfect. 
Thank you any other questions. 
All right. 
We are back in the agenda letter f approval of minutes. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr mike caruso second and by meredith opie. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried number two. 
We are in the visitors section public comment that pertains to the agenda. 
I'm just going to need those cards or, if you're going to call those cards, is fine too 
I'm going to call up the names we do have several. 
I just wanted to make a reminder announcement that the visitor section, the public comment is in fact a public comment. 
It's not a question and answer type of period, so I know that some of the cards that we are getting do have questions on some of the cards that we are getting. 
I think possibly it's better. 
You know to if, if questions are asked, we can have them written down 
and we can take your email and we can have a response sent to you by email. 
If that's good or mr picarella, if you want, we can also include them in our forum on monday. 
That's fine right. 
I just think it would possibly be best to email or you know, speak with you separately regarding,. 
So the first gentleman, mr caputo, I'm sorry capuano, oh, my name is mike capuano. 
My daughter is brooke capuano. 
My daughter goes to sagem, you have an excellent school here 
and you have an excellent school because you have the best teachers in the country. 
I believe, when you take the teachers away, you have a bunch of buildings here:,, to think that you're going to lock a child in a room with a bunch of books 
and if you could fast forward 10 years that, like a doctor or a lawyer, is going to walk out of that room. 
It's just not going to happen.
, now the main reason that we're all here is the six foot: six foot: six foot: six foot- 
that's all we're here for why? 
Don't we tell everybody that that's a farce? 
If you build the partitions around the desk, the six foot is not necessary and I called osha 
and I called the governor's hotline.
, if you build the glass petition, the teachers are worried. 
Also. 
I understand that if you build a glass petition against the front, the teachers could walk in the back and the teachers would be behind the petition. 
711 protects their cashiers and they all come in when it's time for their shift and their're back there. 
Furthermore, the children could walk in behind the children petitions and take the children masks off. 
The teachers could be up there with the blackboards and take The teachers masks off and everything would be back to normal. 
This is all we're all here, because we're refusing to build the petitions. 
You could take that desk. 
There's schools that have taken that desk and they divide it like this boom and boom 
and there's four children on that desk 
and it's totally legal you can be. 
When you put a mask on then or any kind of petition, they said you could be nose to nose. 
I was just in a restaurant that was so packed the booth, the person right behind me I turned around. 
I was looking right in his face. 
I called the hotline from there because- and they said as long as there's a petition, there was a petition in between the booths and the petition was only this tall. 
I was looking in the guy's eyes and they said there's no regulations for the height of the petition.
, so all we need is the petition, and all this is gone.
, second of all, second solution: why don't you just have the people that want to come into school and the teachers that want to come into school come in and the ones that want to stay home and the children that want to stay home stay home instead of forcing the ones that are horrified to come in to come in and the ones that are desperate to come back in. 
My daughter wants My daughter teachers and My daughter wants My daughter school and My daughter wants My daughter friends.
, what? 
If all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in? 
Everybody who needed to came in to to help 
and they kept america going to mind odds that the schools are the only ones that let us down now, as this gentleman said these kids in five years, if we could fast forward to the ones that are starting now, they won't be able to read and write. 
I don't know how many people go to europe, but our kids already can't read and write. 
We are kids in college. 
That can't add this is the death knell of america. 
This is not some small thing here that you're deciding and there's no reason. 
These are guidelines. 
Schools all around you hop hog everything else open five days. 
This is your decision to do in the generation right here. 
Remember that this is the beginning of the end of america,,. 
We hope that they rescind this, but if they don't rescind this, this few years here will be known as the covid dummies. 
they won't make it into college. 
they won't do anything and there's no reason 
and. 
Lastly, I want to say, if you open the schools, why bother the first kid or the first teacher that gets covered you're going to close all of sagem? 
So this is all the foss all this money, the reopening programs and everything. 
It's all a big fuss,
, it's it because this is being treated like the bubonic plague. 
Mr capuano
, I'm sorry there's a three minute time limit.
, thank you. 
Studies all around the world have opened up. 
There's not one case. 
The ymca tracked their own tracing 40, 000. 
Kids, not one mr kevin. 
Thank you very much for coming. 
We appreciate it. 
Thank you so much for listening 
and I wanna say. 
Lastly, the governor said this is for us to talk not three minutes. 
I listened to this young lady for three hours. 
That was not the guidelines. 
You're worried about guidelines, guidelines, the governor said the people should be able to come in and talk not listen to. 
You guys tell me what to do with my child.. 
Thank you very much., miss muchitash. 
can I just start sure um, my name is lauren mukhitash 
I've been in station for 13 years 
now I have elementary age children, I'm going to jump the agenda. 
I'm sorry,, I'm going to jump the agenda a little bit and go to item 12. 
there's been a proposal to create a divor diversity task force in sacrum, central school district. 
I'm here to voice my support for the creation of that task. 
Force sachem student body is comprised of 25 percent racial minority students. 
Our e and l students represent a staggering 98 different languages spoken within this district of 13 000 students. 
Our students represent a multitude of cultures, religions and abilities representation matters. 
Our multifaceted student body deserves to see themselves reflected in themselves teachers and administrators in the books themselves have access to and read 
and then the curriculum they are taught. 
So I would just plead with the board. 
don't render this to a toothless subcommittee with no power. 
There are lots of things that I love about sagem, and I think that this is a step in the direction to improve upon what we already have a strong foundation for. 
Thank you. 
I'm sorry. 
Next is. 
Mr warren 
hi, my name is jason moore, I'm a parent in the community, sageman graduate. 
I would like to make a plea to the board: value and respect the school community by maintaining a high standard of transparency and communication at all times, but particularly in times of crisis. 
The communication from the central office and the board has been unacceptable. 
It is essential for every member of the school community students, teachers and families to be constantly updated at all times about every aspect of the reopening process. 
The meeting this meeting was not advertised to the school community at large. 
There were five parents outside barely and five parents left as soon as possible, communicate the following. 
communicate the following to community immediately. 
How will we ensure that our remote students are receiving an equitable education? 
I can't accept that they will receive a subpar education. 
You've put in your email that I received. 
While I was standing up front says it will not be the same. 
I need it to be equitable. 
I need my child to get an equitable education. 
They need to be live instruction and ongoing assessment. 
We need to figure it out. 
We need to put programmers in place. 
We need to figure it out. 
It has to be figured out. 
We cannot make an exception where part of our school community is receiving a subpar education. 
It's not acceptable, not acceptable to me should not be acceptable to you 
and it's not acceptable to your teaching staff. 
I know that for a fact. 
Secondly, a building space plan must be made available to the teacher to the parents of this community with individual room measurements and the capacity to maintain authentic social distancing at all times, and I need to know about the source of ventilation. 
I need to know what the school buildings look like. 
If you're telling me 17 kids in a classroom, I need to know that there's room for 42 square feet for every 17 one of those students I need. 
I need that in writing. 
Before I even think about sending my child back, I need clear opportunities for all parents to participate in this process. 
I shouldn't stumble upon this. 
I should be knowing about this weeks in advance. 
I need specific criteria for testing and tracing in all school buildings. 
I need a contingency plan for what happens when the rate of transmission rises above three percent. 
What do I do with my child? 
How do I make accommodations? 
I need to know these things before we put we kids on those buses. 
It's unacceptable that you're asking me to put a remote survey in place by friday, and your first parent meeting is on monday. 
That's unacceptable. 
The parents need to know. 
What's going on, the school community needs to know. 
What's going on, the teachers need to know, everybody needs to know it's unacceptable,. 
I need you to do a better job of communicating with the school community. 
Most important details need to be related to about our children's education in the future. 
address these issues immediately. 
The students, the teachers, the families in the school community deserve at least this much. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much. 
Miss favaro campbell
, I'm michelle for campbell. 
I wanted to just address the board about the diversity task force. 
As all of you know, I started that email and requested that that email be put on the agenda and that you all consider creating one. 
It's been 10 years that I, my daughter, started she's going to be a senior now so 10 years ago 
I actually started talking to a lot of district office, which is very changed now. 
Maybe mr scavo might have been on the board of ed back then I don't remember, but most of you are not we're not then. 
It's been 10 years, since my family started talking about the having more diversity and representation within sachem 
and I'm really excited to see it finally make an agenda. 
I want to also make it really clear that it's about race, religion and abilities. 
I want children in wheelchairs to see children in books in children classrooms. 
I want children with autism to know that they are just as represented as every other kid in every princess book in every superhero story, and I want to help show our curriculum expand to teach children that kids with down syndrome can be teachers, because there are stories of preschool teachers who have down syndrome and kids, who are deaf and blind can grow up to graduate harvard law, school and become disability advocates and travel the entire world, and I right now we just don't show that we don't have the staff. 
we don't have diversity in we staff. 
we don't have diversity even in the books that they see when they walk into a classroom. 
So I just wanted to thank you all for putting it on the agenda tonight and for entertaining the idea and to understand that it's actually bigger than one issue
, it's about every kid at sagem walking into their classroom, walking through hallways and right now, where I know reopening and dealing with covid, but this has been 10 years actually a little bit more in the making and sacrum is going to go on long before my daughter, who's going to be a senior and my son is going to be a freshman in high school they're going to be gone, and I don't want to leave that task force 
like I want this to be 10 years from now. 
Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program has a very different experience than what they had, and so that's really important to me that you all knew that. 
So. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss sanders,, everyone, oh, everyone, maria sanders,! 
I am a parent. 
I would like to just make a statement in respect to the reopening committee. 
I 
I was a member of the reopening committee 
and I just would like to express my disappointment in the fact that the reopening committee had no part in the actual planning or process of of the plan that was presented to the community. 
My understanding was that we would be part of that process, but instead we had two meetings where we were basically given the list of directives as administration and and the board of vet had planned. 
So basically, we got a sneak peek and the ability to ask a few questions, though I certainly respect the time and effort and energy that administrators put in, and I will not take anything away from that. 
You fail to utilize the very volunteers that you asked for because there was a tremendous amount of talent within that grouping 
and we certainly could have helped you in putting together this plan for myself having students in second in middle school and high school. 
I recognize that this plan is not going to be adequate for them and again, 
though, I understand right now, we we're hoping that the testing standards are loosened. 
The value of a full-time education will not be, and these children cannot get a full-time education when these children're in school. 
Fifty percent of the time they're only seeing a teacher, fifty percent of the time 
and they're they're sitting home in front of a computer for the other 50 that amounts to 10 days a month when normally they would be in school for five days a week. 
So I just asked that in the future, when you come to the community- 
and you ask us to step up and come in and help you really utilize us, because us voice really has not been heard. 
That's it! 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
miss williamson, nicole williamson,,, miss cologne, everyone, I'm josephine scalon. 
I have a soon to be second and third grader, and I just have a question because I'm still undecided about the virtual verse going to action school. 
If you go to school and you start in the school, do you have the option of then going virtual? 
Would that be an option? 
So I'm sorry 
go ahead. 
I'm sorry! 
So us're in this portion of the agenda. 
us're not allowed to do back and forth and answer questions. 
If you'd like us can have your question written down and leave your contact and us will answer any question that you have. 
I can promise thanks. 
Thank you very much. 
Is it allison? 
Is it on the court? 
Is her email on the card? 
There's a phone number on the card. 
Do you want to put an email perfect? 
Thank you so much, the next one was also several questions. 
Would you prefer to contact this person as well? 
I mean I mean this person's been waiting, so if this person wants to ask this person and then it's miss rep rapuno,, thank you,! 
That's all! 
For the first section we are on page two at the bottom number. 
Three business items consent agenda a through c, and I have a motion. 
motion by bill cogan second, by laura slattery. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried sorry bottom of page three personnel consent agenda. 
A through l. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
This is kate bleedin. 
So this is an unusual way to welcome many of our new staff, as we are having we first kind of live forum most of the time we have folks here to welcome them in person, and some of you are virtual. 
We would like to welcome all of We new staff that We vetted through really intense interview processes this summer with our administrative staffs in the building and staff members, faculty involved in the whole process and. 
That includes clerical custodial teachers, teachers, assistants and I think we have also gotten to the administrative section. 
Did I catch that correctly?
, so we're through the l- 
and I just want to welcome those folks that are in consent, agendas,. 
So far, thanks number five is support staff consent agenda a through j. 
Can I have a motion motion by meredith second, by jimmy and caruso. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried christie. 
Did you want me to stop again cause? 
I think you have michael there. 
joining us today is michael emanuel. 
michael is over here to my left, the far right, 
if you wanted to just stand and give yourself a wave, michael, is joining us today, as the network and systems administrator michael's been a integral part of our technology, staff who have been working with jack renda in it. 
We're really excited about all the great things that We're going to continue to get the growth for We technology as we push through and put our smart schools investment through and and enhance the use of our technology for our students and our staff. 
So welcome michael, we are on the top of page 12 number six personnel administrators consent agenda. 
A through g motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried, we'd like to take a moment to recognize two other folks in the audience today. 
joining us is dennis mcelherne. 
If you want to give a wave- not quite sorry, I'm trying to stay on top of it here. 
They're. 
This close, this close sorry guys a little more suspense 
we're going to be towards the top of page 14 letter h, probationary appointment of the administrative personnel. 
There you go andy. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins? 
Second by mr wadawa discussion, discussion. 
I will be voting on this in the next two personnel items.. 
My reasons are the same as they've been for the past several board meetings concerning central administrative positions. 
That is, I believe, the new superintendent should be part of the process in any administrative appointments.. 
What I must make perfectly clear is that these candidates, as well as those from the prior meetings, are qualified and capable of the positions to which they are being offered, and I would fully support them if the new superintendent was part of the process. 
So this is a process, negative vote and nothing to do with the personnel. 
the new superintendent is close. 
I mean we're almost there 
and we certainly have qualified staff who could perform these functions for a short time as interims, so that for that reason, and that reason alone, I'm voting on the next three administrative positions. 
I must stress it has nothing to do with the individuals. 
I fully support them and would support them in the future. 
Mr kieran, just because you asked for a discussion and for the public and anybody at home by losing our superintendent, our assistant superintendent and our special ed director
, our would have left three positions open where our would have needed interims and just for argument's sake, mr o'keefe. 
What is the going rate for an interim at that level per day? 
For which position are we speaking? 
Let's say it's: the superintendent rates vary, but a going rate for superintendent is probably 12 to 1300 a day, and then what about the assistant super? 
An assistant superintendent, depending upon which position it could be 800 to 1000 a day and an executive director of special ed would also probably be in a similar range, a minimum of 800 a day. 
So what and- 
and I don't necessarily disagree with your argument- 
but what what we did was we took a vote to have these positions filled. 
we had three people doing five people's jobs and it between losing that on a normal year is almost impossible, but losing it during covet is is impossible and we put things into motion to have these positions filled by qualified people to save that money, and this is money that I mean we we already just talked about taking custodians off- that we don't even know if buildings are going to get cleaned in time. 
Now we want to take more money out by filling these positions with indoors. 
I think that that's a slippery slope if we go down that path.
, I appreciate what you're saying my. 
My position is that a superintendent of schools,, is the single most important person in the district and totally accountable to us and the district for making decisions and to have a superintendent of schools, not part of the process. 
Even though a new superintendent come in and doesn't know, the personnel is certainly going to ask the qualified people who who the personnel are and do cement and be part of the interview process. 
I 
I think that's even more important than the saving of a few dollars here and there, but that's 
I mean I
, I see I'm alone in that position, but I stand by it. 
I 
I understand where you're coming from I just if I don't appoint somebody until september 1
, that's a long period of time at thirteen hundred dollars a day, eight hundred dollars a day, and while it seems like a few dollars here and there over a three month period that we haven't had people that it starts to add up, and when we need money down the line, I would be afraid that we put it on in a room 
is when we had qualified people who could take these positions immediately? 
I will remind you of your fiscal prudence soon, [Laughter] alex just because we're having a discussion, 
so mr 
kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight
, I I have personally known all of them. 
So it's without hesitation that I think that they are the best fit for sachem. 
I don't care who our superintendent is. 
I've trusted mr o'keefe, as our interim superintendent, to make the recommendations, and I 100 percent agree that any superintendent coming in will not find any better candidates than the ones we're putting forth tonight. 
Opposed motion is carried dennis, we're going to start with andrew larson, so andrew just want to welcome you to the high school north principalship
, andy has been a teacher in our schools. 
andy's been in personnel, 
andy's been in an elementary hiawatha principleship, 
a sagamore principalship, an ap and two of our high schools, and now andy's joining the ranks of the leader ship in north 
and we'd like to welcome you and wish you all the best we are on letter. 
I probationary appointment of the executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion. 
motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
[Applause] dennis mclehern. 
He's 
He's welcome back to sacham. 
He has been in our school district working as a school psychologist, an assistant to coordinator for special education. 
He left for a short stint to go over to north bab as a director over there 
and we're really lucky to have 
He back and part of we team as the executive assist executive director for special education. 
Welcome back [Applause] and letter 
j is an approval of an saa agreement for the executive executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion motion by ms slattery? 
Second, if I miss volpe, all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 14. contracts consent agenda. 
A through t. 
Can I have a motion ocean by mr coggins second by mrs wadwa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 20.. 
It's an action, itemist number, a mandated new york state board, training for matthew, bauman and robert scavo, all in favor, get kind of a motion motion by mrs volpe second by mr man. 
Caruso all in favor opposed motion is carried number b. 
It's an appointment of board committee members. 
Can I have a motion motion by miss lottery second by mr scavo. 
Any questions all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
Letter c. Is a board of education retreat? 
Can I have a motion motion by ms wado, a second by mr bauman, all in favor. 
Any questions sure I just want to make a quick comment:, especially since we're being fiscally prudent, a retreat is not like gurneys or something it's where we all sit in a room and talk. 
I just want to make sure that that's clear, because we are not going on vacation, though, because my first year I was prepared for gurney's 
and then we sat in the same set library. 
Thank you. 
we are on the top of page 22.. 
I'm sorry 
are we 
I apologize. 
Can I all in favor opposed motion is carried the top of page 22 donations consent agenda a through c. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggin second by miss ottawa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried number 10 at the bottom of page 22 committee on special education consent agenda, a through b motion by miss volpe. 
Second by mr mancaruso, all in favor opposed motion is carried number 11 monthly reports. 
So we there was a question from the community about when the committees would start meeting and how I think that, maybe, if people that were leading these committees, we want to maybe set some dates. 
we could do something virtually 
I'd like to see the budget committee start talking about if there was a possible mid-year cut and look into any and all options that there was. 
I don't know if there was anything else that you may want to look into, but that's just one that I thought of. 
I don't know about the budget committee. 
If mr kiernan has anything for the budget committee,, all right number, 12, we are back on public comment. 
This portion of the public comment will be on any and all items that anybody wants to speak at. 
That's not on the agenda, and everyone will have three minutes to discuss and, like we said before, this is not a q a and a back and forth, but we do want everyone to be able to be heard. 
That wants to be heard.
, the first one is miss young [Music]., I press this., thank you for waiting for so long. 
Thank you. 
You guys have been outside the season board of education, members and community. 
It's come to my attention that vp sarah waterworld wore a bill.
,, we're a blm t-shirt at a board of education meeting. 
This is unacceptable. 
I can respect a person's right to free speech and to have their opinion. 
However, blm is a political movement and it does not belong at our border bed meetings or in our schools and indoctrinations. 
The definition of a racist is paramount in the name of black lives matter. 
The name indicates that black lives matter over the other races. 
This is unacceptable and this racism does not belong, including the blm is putting itself over our law enforcement, which many of our community are employed and of all races this once again making blm a black organization. 
Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives have not registered as a charitable organization. 
We do not know whether the blm t-shirt, that was worn was for the black lives foundation or movement in either case. 
It has no right if any one of the board members wore my hat supporting trump, I'm sure the same thing would happen. 
The apology that was put on facebook was cynical and scolding. 
Call us as all races and insisting blm is not is not a political issue. 
Last I checked. 
Everyone in america had the same rights regardless of race, sex, color and sexual orientation. 
As specific cases of discrimination are happening in our community, then we must address those issues. 
What offended me is the use of rap music before sporting events, glorifying women's segregation, drug use and the cursing and the songs with the word and in it this is not acceptable. 
If we are going to talk about discrimination, it can it's got to be used both ways. 
So, let's start by banning that bml, not political, tell that to the murder black trump supporter bernal tramell. 
Furthermore, the disgusting political use of blm as an attack on our police and blue lives is not acceptable. 
Our community of all sects and races is made up of law enforcement. 
Blm is declaring war against all blue lives matter. 
Miss young there's a three-minute time limit. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much, miss, so conor. 
Thank you very much for waiting. 
I know that it's been a while 
okay.
, I am beyond angry at what is going on with our children.
, we are not doing the right thing by we children in any way, shape or form at this point in time whether we want to send our children to school or keep our children home. 
Neither of those options currently are acceptable. 
I sent everybody board members in email. 
I got one reply challenged every one of your board members to go and spend 10 minutes in one of the one of the classrooms. 
On the first floor in the second floor of one of the high schools did any of you do that? 
I didn't think so. 
Yet you all think it's fine, obviously that we have no ventilation in the classrooms for crying out loud. 
We have to have special ventilation in the malls and other businesses, but where We most vulnerable are we don't? 
None of you would work in these classrooms in the current conditions, none of you. 
So why would you think it's okay for our children to be in there even before this, but 
definitely now now the air in those classrooms just stands there, because there's no movement, there's,, nothing and covert will stand in the air until it falls down on somebody so you're putting our children in an environment that is guaranteeing that if somebody has gold, but it's going to get on all the rest of our children horrendous, it's despicable 
and now I'm hearing that remote learning is going to be a joke. 
That's not okay! 
Either!, I don't want my child in one of those rooms. 
I want my child safe, but my child is taking five ap classes next year, which means he needs a robust distance learning program. 
But my understanding is we're not doing that. 
Am I incorrect? 
No. 
So what we're doing to we children is despicable and you should all be ashamed of yourself just a second. 
Mr block, just a second, mr kyle 
I'll get your answer question right now. 
I had a conversation with him. 
You know, I know that you were asking the question about the being restricted in terms of the assembly, but 
it's pursuant to the governor's executive order, one of the number of executive orders 202.45, I looked. 
I believe I looked at that one, and that was talking about social media. 
This is okay, I'm just gonna back up just a little bit just so we can keep we space now. 
It talks about non-essential gatherings., and this is not essential. 
That's correct as long as while we're virtual, because you still have the option of being virtual, the board decided to assemble. 
so so you guys decided. 
This was not essential. 
So because you decided the governor, that's not that they don't decide.! 
So who decides well, there's based upon the governor's orders. 
the governor said that this is an honest. 
the governor said that we can conduct this meeting virtually or, you can but. 
So as long as you can conduct it, virtually meeting is considered to be non-essential because you have the ability to be able to connect the virtual reality.
, thanks thank you for that. 
It's, mr black, 
so 202.45 it was extended by 202.53 and it's in effect, until august 20th,, 
next fury good evening, I'm a proud sacrum educator and a parent of three daughters who attend sageman schools. 
I'm here tonight to voice my concerns regarding the secondary reentry plan. 
I have a daughter in eighth grade 
and I also have a senior. 
I have grave concerns regarding the lack of an equitable education for our secondary students. 
These children will suffer the ramifications of this decision in which These children will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
In some instances, this decision may change the course of their adult lives. 
I don't want that to happen to my children 
and I don't want it to happen to anyone else's. 
I implore you to reconsider the secondary reentry plan and attempt to find a way to make the secondary re-entry plan more equitable, so that our chm students can receive 100 of the curriculum that they are entitled to just like our elementary students. 
Thank you. 
That's all 23 board discussions. 
The first one we put on today was an adoption of the 20 2021 calendar. 
There was a talk of a change. 
Mr o'keefe. 
It's just you know something I want to bring to the board's attention because obviously administration has been meeting with district administrators as well as our teachers looking at the opening of school and just trying to be sure that we can be as prepared as possible for whatever that is. 
Other districts have taken a look at this and also chosen that option each year a district is allowed up to four superintendents conference days. 
Our current calendar has three. 
The first two are in september the september second, and third days are superintendents conference days and the third one would be. 
On election day november. 
Third, we've been discussing the possibility of having the board consider the ninth, which is wednesday
, I'm sorry, eighth, which would be the the first day of school for students to be a third superintendent's conference day in september. 
That would give staff teachers administrators everything all the time that staff teachers need to be sure if there are those last minute, tweaks changes to classroom setups changes to schedules assignments. 
Whatever the case is, you know, I had a lengthy conversation with mr barbara last night. 
You know his guidance. 
Counselors are ready to dive in to do whatever work needs to be done to make our secondary experience as good as possible, but we need the data first. 
So once we have that data we can dive in on this, we don't have much time and time is not on we side. 
So for your consideration, we'd like to talk about adding the eighth as a superintendent's conference day. 
Would we have to remove another day off the calendar for that we would just convert that date to a super. 
I wouldn't alter the calendar right now other than that. 
Obviously, since the year hasn't even begun, it still keeps us within legal limits. 
it still leaves us the flexibility if we were to have a severe winter. 
You know, maybe with the new reality of our ability to switch between distance learning. 
Maybe that can even help us. 
You know in bad storms and things like that, where us might be able to turn something like that on and not lose instructional time, but I think giving the staff that extra time, especially since we're down to the wire you know, could be helpful now on the counter side. 
Obviously, families are already starting to make plans families're ready to send kids back on the 8th families've already made decisions families've arranged child care. 
Whatever the case is so it isn't just as simple as you deciding let's re-adopt a calendar, and maybe it's not even something you do tonight. 
Maybe it's something you consider you think about, and maybe it's on the next agenda for the 26th, but I wanted to bring it to your attention to give you some time to think about it and talk about it. 
you know. 
Is it a possibility where we could consider that day, for additional staff planning? 
Does anybody have a question about the calendar? 
I'm just thinking we're gonna make this decision. 
we have to make it tonight, so parents do have enough time to make arrangements. 
Mr bauman, can you what kind of professional development day would it look like? 
What would it look like?
, it would be a useful day for the teachers too. 
It's not a none. 
I mean miss heinz, can speak better to the professional development days. 
None of them are going to be like the normal professional development days. 
I'm sorry
, I didn't mean professional development superintendent's day. 
Would it be a day that the teachers would be able to kind of get the teachers stuff together?
, we so I mean, as we've been saying, our teachers have been working hard all summer ongoing professional development. 
This is really more honored space for our teachers, so our teachers can continue to clean up. 
Get things ready, make sure the google classrooms all their lessons, are in place. 
So not our traditional. 
You know ad camp style superintendents conference days, but we recognize that it's a tremendous amount of work to get started. 
Does anybody have any other questions? 
Does anybody want to vote on it tonight or did you was the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready? 
It came through a conversation. 
You know, administration and staff have asked for it. 
So I agree with sarah the earlier the better I would agree as well. 
We can vote on it right now. 
All right motion to change the calendar to the eighth being a staff development day. 
Second, by miss volpe, all in favor opposed the calendar is done, get that information out to families as quickly as possible. 
The next item up for discussion is future board letter writing. 
This is something that I personally put on. 
I 
I don't think that we should be putting letters out to the community if, with all of we names on it, if we don't agree with what it says, and I could be in the minority on that- 
but I'm I would be fine with writing a letter, putting spaces underneath and letting those who agree. 
Do it now 
most times it's a nine, nothing 
and there's no issues 
but. 
You know I personally didn't agree with the letter that got put out and if my name is going to be on it especially admonishing another board member. 
I have to agree with it 
and that's just the way I personally feel about it. 
I understand that we're a body 
and I get that, 
but at the end of the day, it's our name 
and we have to put we head on 
we pillows and 
if we don't agree with something I want everyone to have the freedom to not only say that but be able to just to live with the decisions that are made and to be able to stand up to the community and say here. 
I did this or I did not do this and have a straight face when you say it, 
I 
I just 
I didn't agree and 
it's my fault for you know ever putting my name on that piece of paper. 
So I just I want to put it from here on out. 
If anyone has an issue, feel free, but if, whatever letter it is, we write the letter, our names are on the bottom and we can sign the letter if we agree with the letter. 
If we don't, we take the space away and then you don't have to sign the space. 
If you don't want to, but at least you can, you can make your own decision and you don't have to feel like you're beholden, 
because maybe it's only five people who agree with it and five out of the nine agree and now, all of a sudden, it's a board decision and your name goes on it, no matter what jim so
, how do you determine whose name is going on suppose four people want the letter out is: is that sufficient to send the letter with four names? 
That's! 
That's why it's up for discussion, so I did it. 
So it's got to be a majority. 
Take to even have the letter go out, so five members have to support the letter and then, let's suppose it's a 5-4, the letter does go out board of education and the five members who agree with the letter sign the letter. 
That's 
I'm going to see that if anybody had an issue with that, I I just wanted to address it tonight so that we haven't had a chance to get all together in a room. 
So so let me express you on the opposite end of the spectrum. 
If four people want to put a letter out and it's a four or five board, the four people be able to put a letter out, because the way that, when you sign up for the board of education, you sign up as a group, and you vote as a group- 
and, listen, there are things that happened in the past. 
Why? 
I was on the no side of a vote where I got dragged to the mud, but I signed up for that. 
You know, so my my impression is that five is a majority and and it's what moves resolutions and it's what moves you know. 
You know different different incent, you know initiatives and so on and so forth. 
So so I think the easy way to do that is that when you're getting attacked by a community member, because of what the letter says, your response is look the board. 
The board majority voted on it. 
I don't necessarily agree with it. 
You know, if you have concerns, contact the rest of the board. 
You know 
and that's how we leave it. 
Just just my just my personal opinion this I happen to disagree 
only because when we pass, let's just say the new principle for sage of north in the in the minutes, it will reflect that jim voted.
, it's not going to vote that., we voted, but if you go look in the in the back to it, jim can say I 
I 
I said and 
jim could say anybody to the community and here's why I voted and jim could put jim head on jim polo and jim's fine like it will not reflect that. 
I said and, and just, I think it's wrong- that you get dragged through the mud on stuff that you voted for, and you can't even back it up, because there is no record of you ever saying.
, unless you look through certain things on votes, but if it's a letter, there's no record of anybody saying, but if the letter's coming from the board of education is it coming from the board of education? 
Is it coming from five board members? 
I mean I, so I guess my point is: I don't think we should be writing any letter. 
That's admonishing another member 
I mean most most letters are in agreement to the state saying we need we funding to the state saying we don't agree with certain things that they're doing, but we should certainly not be or so and maybe, mr black, you can answer this. 
When we get elected to the board of education, my voice means nothing more than anybody sitting out there. 
My voice only means one as part of us nine. 
We 
I have no 
I can't decide anything. 
I have no more decision making than my neighbor next door. 
My my only input or influence comes as as a board of nine, so the letters that we had done previously, like supporting we seniors graduating in person or the denouncement of betty devos as the education or denouncing racism that was issued as a board, not as me as an individual. 
So I think legally, mr black, if you could just give us some guidance here that, when the board of education of sagem school district issues a letter, I think it has to come from the board. 
If laura slattery, who who lives in wisconsin, wants to send a letter to governor cuomo, then I signed my name: laura slattery, not laura slattery, ch, board of education, trustee and- 
and that's 
I feel that me on this board, I'm not a republican democrat independent anything. 
I am representing a community of 55 000 registered voters, my personal opinions or anything I feel 
personally does not matter when I'm sitting here with the nine nine of us. 
My only thing that I can do as a board trustee is in as a majority of this board. 
Unless, legally you see something, that's how I feel I was elected by the voters. 
I was elected by my sachim community. 
I 
I feel like I have to represent my sagem community as one of nine, not as laura slattery individual and, of course I don't think, that's being suggested, but we're a governing body and every governing body around the country operates that way. 
You operate as a body, you're elected to be part of this body. 
You make decisions as a as a body. 
There may be differences of opinion, that's part of our democracy. 
That's what makes the country great you'll, be able to express those opinions. 
At the end of the day, you have to make a collective decision, and then you have to abide by the decision that that body makes one possible solution. 
Is that? 
If you are going to issue a letter and there's concerns that dissenting members vote is not going to be known like it is? 
When we take a public vote, you can take a public vote to send the letter, and then you can adopt a letter as a majority vote. 
Those who dissent are on as a matter of record Those who dissent're on Those who dissent're on record, if that's the case, so so you're saying that no one member is allowed to remove their name from a letter. 
I would say that that's not typical practice that you would see, but is it legal for a member to remove a name?, if the, when your letter is going out, I don't think it typically sets forth all the names. 
I don't know. 
I don't really like to say it. 
Has it printed all your names on the left side, it says, there's a list of all the names and on the bottom
, it's the president's name. 
So, on the left side of the letter it has all of our names listed. 
But that's your that's! 
Your letterhead lists all your names. 
It doesn't indicate whether or not you voted for that letter to go out or not. 
It's you're represented on Your letterhead. 
It's an official board of education stationery! 
That's why your name is on there. 
It's not signaling that you voted for that or not, but the recognition is, though, that when you do take a vote or when the board puts out material that that's so 
so that's a fine
, that's a compromised decision. 
I think that any and all letters should be discussed in public and voted in our public. 
That is a concern that you have that's one way of addressing it. 
I I was just going. 
I was just going to say that that sounds like an excellent idea and that really just goes back to 
you said about my vote. 
You know is on record and your eight votes are on record for these fine individuals here. 
So that would be the same thing. 
We discuss a letter. 
You know we take a vote on it.
, if it's a majority vote, a letter will go, but the dissenters are also in the minutes. 
I like it 
and I'm 100 in agreement with that. 
This way, it's a public discussion. 
Anybody can look back, but then we still are issuing a letter based on a majority of the board, but as long as there's a record of who votes and who votes?
, I'm correct. 
I am 100 fine with that. 
Just one statement and me and laura have gone round and round about this before, but I want to. 
I want to make this point. 
Look we're all elected members to this board as any elected official is. 
If I want to write a letter- 
and I want to sign my letter bill, cogan board trustee sachem, I'm 100 within my rights- to do that. 
It's a matter of opinion as to whether or not I should do that 
if I want to get together with four other board members and each one of us want to sign it as board trustees. 
Once again, us are within us rights to do that. 
All right. 
It may be perceived as a bad idea by this board, but there's nothing illegal about it.
, inside it's not a vote. 
I don't think we're going to take here. 
I just I just wanted to make sure that we discussed it and there was at least a public so that all future letter writing is done in public and just also just to add to it. 
It's been customary that at the bottom of the letter, the signature block states, the president's name on behalf of just signed the letter sincerely the sachin board of education and not place the president's name on the bottom of the letter.
,, the last item up for discussion is the diversity task force. 
So, as you guys know, I gave you guys all an outline about what just got a little bit closer.
, I gave you all the an outline, probably in the end of july, and I don't know if you all got a chance to look it over. 
I shared it with this board again the other day. 
Sarah. 
So I would just like to make a motion to put it on to vote tonight on establishing this task force. 
I mean my my only issue is, and I don't have a problem with this diversity task force, but the way community committees are usually done is that we could vote to establish one give direction to administration to come back as to what the charge is going to be talk about the charge and then approve it. 
I 
I 
I would say that that's that's, probably the route we should go and in the years that have been on this board
, we establish construction capital projects, committees and you know some are established for one specific job 
and then they 
they they disappear, and that was for one of the. 
You know construction projects that we did after that 
we didn't do any for a while. 
So we didn't need that organization, but I would say that we we either vote on it tonight.
, we want to pursue something like this. 
we understand what the end game is, what we're trying to achieve 
and then normally what happened is administration would put together a packet of a pamphlet, that's made available to the community. 
They could download it in a pdf format. 
People would sign up for it submit in the same way People would for a budget advisory committee. 
You know or so 
or you know any other thing, so I would just say that we we follow that format. 
You know and- 
and you know, we're not adopting exactly what the world 
but we're establishing a diversity, task force and and charging administration to come back to us with what the charge is going to be. 
I would have no problem with that. 
Any questions everyone all in favor of 
I'm sorry, yep. 
I read the whole thing like lots of times. 
I think it's great, you know we need it here in saturn, all in favor, all right any opposed. 
Mr picariello, this still one visitor that we had called wasn't here at the time. 
miss williamson. 
Thank you, miss williamson, I'm sorry! 
I know that it's late, I apologize. 
I was doing yard work 
and I was listening. 
Thank you and I had to come 
so I apologize. 
This is my first time doing anything like this, so I really don't have anything written out or able to look up anything outside. 
So I'll tell you about myself. 
I have four children, three at hiawatha, two of them with severe nut allergies and one of them with viral induced asthma. 
I didn't, I don't really know.
, let me just go with this. 
My kids are fine, My kids will be homeschooled and My kids will be homeschooled.. 
What about all the other children that aren't as lucky as My kids? 
How come? 
Nobody is talking about them? 
How come what nobody's talking about the children getting hit at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't eating at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't learning or being sexually abused at home? 
Nobody cares about those kids. 
I hear a lot of things, how we're emptying the rooms and there's going to be nothing in there? 
No one's allowed to touch each other, no one's allowed near each other. 
we're not 
we're teaching we kids to be scared. 
I was scared for a long time. 
I've been hurt. 
I've been scared of allergies and a nut killing. 
My child fear cannot run us. 
We need to stand up for who We are and what We believe in 
and I believe all our children deserve a fair chance at life 
and We are not giving it to them. 
I think I think that's it. 
Thank you very much. 
I know that you waited a while. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Letter c is board of ed discussion. 
Future agenda items future discussion. 
Items excuse me: does anyone have anything future to talk about covered three tonight? 
We, the next meeting. 
I don't know if that's the right date. 
That's today.
, the 26th is august. 
26Th
, we're hoping to still be here at 7, 30 p.m. 
Can I have a motion to move into executive session 
now we need a reason. 
Mr block, we're discussing we're discussing property,, property. 
I'm sorry! 
I just lost me. 
First real estate transaction, real estate transaction. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins say goodbye, mr bauman. 
All in favor meeting is good. 
Thank you very much. 
Everyone good night be careful. 
Going home,.
Thank you very much. 
is [Music], read the congratulations, so,,, visitors!
, everyone rise for the pledge and then remain standing for a moment of silence with liberty and justice for all. 
Thank you [Music] good evening. 
Everyone, as you can see, the board of education is attempting to return to some form of public meeting, which is also compliant within the limits set forth by the governor's executive orders and the guidelines of the cdc and department of health. 
We must limit the number of people permitted to be physically present as a part of our compliance with those obligations. 
Perhaps the most important item for our meeting tonight is a public discussion about the reopening plan for september, as it pertains to the plan. 
We hope to have answers to most of your questions as part of the presentation, but may also need time for the administration to research, an issue on occasion. 
You can always email the superintendent with the question as well. 
I am also aware that some attendees may wish to speak about matters related to conversations that occurred on social media and the role of the board of education. 
In that regard, if you wish to speak, be sure to fill out a card and give a card to the district clerk. 
There will be two opportunities for public to speak at this meeting. 
The first is limited to comments relating to agenda items only. 
We will then move through the agenda after We complete the agenda items. 
A second opportunity for public comment about non-agenda items will be provided. 
I ask that all present be reminded to be respectful of one another. 
The administration and the board. 
Also the opportunity for public comment is just that public comment. 
The board of education will not engage in debate or back and forth with the public during the period of public comment in an attempt to provide all who wish to speak an opportunity to do so. 
Our policy limits comments to three minutes. 
There may be people who wish to speak, who have been left outside due to space limitations. 
ask security station at the doors for a card and they will bring it in to the clerk again. 
While we respect the community and we always want to provide people with the opportunity to be heard if things devolve into personal insult or invective as the president, I will entertain a motion to adjourn the meeting. 
I thank you all in advance for your cooperation to start tonight's meeting. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe are going to make a presentation about our reentry plan. 
Sure miss florio. 
Could you fire up the cameras for us 
all right just give us a moment. 
While we wait for that and while we're doing that, I'd also like to apologize to those from watching from home, because, unfortunately, obviously from that distance you're not really going to be able to see we screen. 
So for that we're very sorry. 
You know, unfortunately, the limitations of how many people are in the room you know have we been able to move it to an auditorium. 
we certainly would have done that, but we're limited to a total of 50 people or 50 of a room's capacity. 
Whichever number is lower, so, unfortunately we're at that 50 capacity in this room this evening. 
This document, we're going to show tonight again is another evolving document. 
Back on the 31st, we placed the district's plan on the website, as required by state law. 
the district's plan on the website had to talk about three different models for return, which the district's plan on the website did since the plan was posted on the website. 
You may have seen additional commentary from our governor where he has since changed some of the parameters, such as offering additional opportunities for choice for family and or for staff. 
So we need to take those things into consideration. 
So again, this document and the presentation you're going to see this evening is the most accurate as of now, but it by far is not completed at the conclusion of tonight's meeting in this presentation, you're going to get a copy of this presentation emailed to you through the school messenger system, it'll also be up on social media and it'll, be up on our website, you're, also going to receive an invitation to participate in a survey regarding choice. 
It's a follow-up to the survey that we sent out last week, where we asked potential preferences, this one's going to need to be more definitive where we actually need to know which families are looking to have which families children receive instruction at home versus those that are willing to send children to school. 
So without further ado, I'm going to ask miss heinz to start us off. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe. 
So this morning us actually concluded and had us last committee meeting, which culminated in the plan that us're going to be sharing with you tonight and, as mr o'keefe said, all of the community members will be receiving at eight o'clock a phone call to this manner and also the plan and the survey for remote learning. 
I just want to thank all of the folks that were on that committee with us. 
We are made up of several community members unit leaders, staff of all sorts, and it really has been a pleasure to work with everybody. 
Excuse me one second, while I got this on, so after a tremendous amount of feedback that we received from our survey from our community and given the lengthy documents that we have given out and the models over the past few months, I can happily say that we are able to offer a full return for our elementary students k-5, as well as a full return for our students with disabilities, our special class, which would be our 15-1 classes, our 12-1 classes and our 8-1 students, and at the secondary level due to size and the fact that, because we will need to reappropriate space at both levels, elementary and secondary, we will have to move forward with a hybrid model for grades six to twelve, and that will be an a b schedule based on alpha and household. 
The reason why we were able to offer a full return for our elementary school is because mr o'keefe and myself and we instructional directors and our director for facilities and the building principal began walk-throughs. 
Last week. 
we walked through each and every room in we buildings to space and measure at six feet. 
On the average we are able to fit about 17 students in a class. 
Now again, know that we have scheduled a full return with our total population, so with any remote instruction that would diminish the amount of students coming into our schools, so we would actually have even more room because of the re appropriation of space we needed about one extra section or one extra grade level k5 at each building generally, so we are going to be utilizing space in our libraries in our arts and our music rooms and other common areas, which we'll talk about a little bit later on remote learning is something that, as you know, last week, it was confirmed that we will, as districts need to be offering this to our students as well. 
This will be a parent choice and a consent tonight at eight o'clock. 
Again, when you receive that plan, there will be a survey in there 
and we ask that only parents who are looking to remotely instruct their child fill out the survey, and it is due. 
It is a fast turnaround by friday. 
We need to be able to staff and schedule the remaining students that We have coming into We schools, remote learning again, 
that is by a parent's choice with consent and at this time it is a decision for the entirety of the 2021 school year. 
I say this now because, based on the number of possible staff who may also look for accommodations, that might mean staff members staying home in conjunction with our students, we need to match up to see if we have enough staff members who are going to be able to offer remote instruction or should we have to look towards live streaming. 
If we do not have enough certificated staff that matches up with the number of students, and so therefore we would not have possibly a physical space for students to come back to. 
If that were the case, should, of course, all restrictions be lifted through the governor's office, then we would have to, and hopefully would have a little bit of time in between. 
We would just have to restructure and reschedule to ensure that all students are able to return remote instruction will entail. 
It is not like being in person school and it is not distance. 
Learning. 
Distance learning is only going to be offered. 
If, again, we are ordered by the governor's office to remain at home. 
All students and all staff remain at home, and that would be live instruction for two and a half hours on google me that would be k12. 
Remote learning is different. 
This is, more asynchronous learning with possible, live or streaming teaching happening throughout the day. 
This would also be a schedule that would look a tad different based again on the number of students and how we would need to support everybody, but we just did want to be. 
You know fully upfront and present about that. 
We also know that devices for We 
We are not a one-to-one school district. 
We have definitely made some strides and We are in the middle of major infrastructure work that is going on. 
We just did order about a thousand new chromebooks in order to be able to disperse for families that do not have any technology in their home at all, but it would be difficult for us to provide a device for every student in their home 
should their be on remote learning. 
So that would be something that the family would also have to consider. 
Students will be expected to complete all assignments daily and any students, obviously with disabilities on remote learning, would be provided all of Students accommodations as per iep. 
As for their iep okay, it's important
, I'm sorry, it's important to just also talk about the secondary hybrid model for six to twelve. 
On your a day, let's just say, you know, for the sake of just explaining it to everybody, it would be a combination on on a day. 
You would be in your child would run their traditional regular schedule. 
their would leave with homework and any work that would be on their google classroom for the next day that their are home, while the teacher is then teaching the other second half of the class on b. 
Obviously, our teachers are committed folks and our teachers would be checking in answering any questions within that 24-hour period, but we would expect that at the secondary level, again, kids will be making sure that all of kids assignments are completed and kids are, and kids are present. 
Attendance is important as we move forward in this school year.
, now that we shared with you a model of how we're looking to return our students, I think it's very important that all families and community members now our staff knows about the health and safety measures that we are putting in place, and we continue to look to put more in place as as time goes on, masks will be required for all staff and students, both in school and on the bus. 
Remember that the bus is an extension of school, any students are having any difficulty wearing a mask for medical reasons or because of a disability will need to submit documentation. 
As always, they would affirm this with they building principle or through the office of student services. 
Mass breaks will be provided because remember in our classrooms. 
Our desks are six feet apart and in the regulations. 
Children do not have to wear a mask during instruction. 
We would encourage, of course, that masks be worn at all times, but that does give We the opportunity to give multiple mass breaks whenever a child does need it, while they're being instructed masks are to be worn, though, however, in the hallways cafeterias, if they're being instructed masks're not eating recess any other common area that we would just want to be safe,, we also every day. 
I'm, excuse me. 
bus travel will also include, as I said, before, social distancing practices optimally. 
We will be looking for six feet spacing and encouraging family members to sit together. 
Every day, parents and staff will be expected to fill out an online health screening survey and in this presentation, when you do receive it, you will see a hyperlink in there that you can see a sample of what it looks like ahead of time. 
We are also. 
We also took time to ensure that at arrival and dismissal, varied entrances in all of We buildings will be sanctioned off to separate grade levels. 
If they come off of the bus, we are also looking to take off the grade levels at increments of time off the bus. 
So everybody is not coming out at the same time so again, just looking to work ways to have plenty of flow while classmans may not look typical, especially at the younger levels. 
You may not see some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see. 
know that our classrooms will be warm and inviting like they always are, because they teachers will be there. 
their teachers principals will be there and we will still be able to decorate it. 
we will just not be able to decorate it with things that kids will be touching, because it would need to be sanitized every day. 
All classrooms will be devoid, as I said before, of any of those items that may collect germs. 
We are in the process right now, of setting up opportunities for our teachers to continue to clean out our teachers our teachers own personal items, and We are also moving out any unwanted furniture that we don't need in the room so that we can maximize 
the space hallways and other common spaces are being marked appropriately to ensure social, distancing, so markings on the floor items around on the walls and that's also shared later on in our presentation. 
So you will be able to see it at home as well. 
When you open up the link hand, sanitizer stations are located throughout each building, all along the hallways. 
We will also be having them at the elementary level or any other area for gym cafeteria time when, at the secondary level, them're able to go out so 
as children go in and out, they can use a hand sanitizer as they come into school. 
All of those. 
You know, welcoming areas would have a hand sanitizer station as well and at the elementary level. 
We would expect that the students, because we do have sinks in every room they would be washing they hands before and after snack and before and after lunch., so continued on. 
As I said earlier, we have reappropriated spaces at the elementary level and we are in the process of doing the same walkthroughs. 
Now in the secondary buildings. 
We know it's going to be very difficult, especially for the cafeterias to be utilized the way that they typically are, because children cannot sit in those tables together. 
So moving in some desks, looking at classroom use all of those different types of things, but really at the elementary level. 
We will be using again if We're going on full return for all students. 
Right now in elementary school, we would be looking to utilize our music space, our art space, and so therefore, those special areas become pushing for our students. 
We have worked with those departments and We'll continue to work to make sure that those departments have everything that those departments need for those departments lessons and equipment. 
Cleaning of all buildings will occur daily in the evenings in each classroom. 
We will also provide hand, sanitizer, wipes, gloves and any sort of spray bottles and wipe offs for for We staff and or students who feel encouraged to clean in between applicable filters have also been changed in our classroom events. 
We will also look to open up We windows 
and We doors where we can. 
Obviously you know the reverse was safety making sure that your doors were always locked. 
Your windows were always closed. 
Now, we're being encouraged by the department of health to please use fresh air when possible. 
So we will look to do that prior to it becoming too chilly up. 
Isolation areas have been identified in our buildings, and so, if a child is it has any sort of of symptoms or they come to school 
and they have not filled out the health screening. 
Those students would be placed there so that we can offer a temperature check and make sure that everything looks okay before we send Those students down to Those students 
classroom hygiene protocol visuals will exist in all buildings if Those students're not there. 
Already and again I share those with you at the end of our presentation so that you can see those. 
We will also be having routine hygiene drills much in the same of how We have regular school building drills at this time. 
Unfortunately, no visitors will be permitted in our schools. 
We just cannot provide enough secure measures for We staff and our students, and so again We will be limiting all visitors. 
Both traditional fire and hygiene. 
Drills will be conducted elementary snack and lunch will be in the classroom to minimize flow and secondary lunch. 
It may be in the cafeteria and alternately in the classrooms. 
We will also rotate any outdoor areas so for recess any of those other matters classes will be rotated on the game field, the basketball court, let's say, for example, and in our playgrounds students, are encouraged to bring their own water bottles. 
We do have bottle filling stations in all of our buildingsWe . 
We water fountains, unfortunately, will have to be closed at this time.
, so just some additional elementary return details that we wanted to share with you. 
You know it's always tough to start with health and safety, because again we don't want it to sound, like our students are returning to jail, but we do want to make sure that we students and we staff feel safe for the return. 
But know that, on top of everything that we are doing, the social emotional well-being of our students is of the utmost importance to us, as well as of us staff, and we have surveyed students and we are looking to survey further the rest of we staff to just find out what are some of those underlying issues or concerns that people have. 
So we can ensure that we have we mental health staff there for supports. 
Unfortunately, we we will have to stress that students may not share materials. 
At this time, students will be assigned students own independent, math, workbooks and guided reading baggies will be provided weekly so that we have time to interchange them out clean them up and leave them for the weekend, so that there's a two to three day lag before the children pick up a new baggie and in those items we will integrate. 
As always in our literacy and our math, our science and social studies, topics whenever possible, this will be in addition to the strong direct instruction that our classroom teachers provide. 
Already all all students will be benchmarked for all all students ela and all all students math to identify all all students present learning levels. 
Curriculum will be retard as needed. 
We definitely know that this will need to occur for math, and We have provided some slides in the past that show you that We're fortunate we created our own math curriculum here 
a couple of years back 
and we know the the one to two units that each grade level will probably need to go back to so that, if I'm coming into second grade, I'm certainly not going to be able to start on my second grade. 
Math curriculum 
I'll need to be re-taught, some of the materials from when I was in first grade and for literacy. 
Once the teacher knows the collective levels of what they have in they room, they will be able to accommodate those literacy. 
Lessons around that art and music will be a push in again to minimize the flow, and we are currently working with our art, music departments. 
This is one that was a really tough hit. 
Music has to be 12 feet. 
Apart for any coral or any sort of wind instruments, we are working we hardest with that department. 
we are very fortunate here. 
we have a very strong music program and we do not want to see that diminish, 
and so we are looking for ways to think out of the box in order to be able to offer course opportunities that might be in smaller sections and different ways to offer lessons as well, but we have provided and are keeping all lesson areas in the elementary schools, so that students can still maintain lessons as needed. 
Physical education will be a mix of separating two classes. 
Typically, that are adjoined, so one class will be in the gym. 
One class will be outside and inclement weather they will rotate between the gym and in the classroom.
, mr butel and miss mcentee have reworked mcentee curriculum to ensure that all team sports will be done in the spring, so all of those units will be taught in the spring and in the beginning it will be more personal. 
Fitness. 
Traditional grading will also return for our students. 
While we know that there may be some interruption in terms of what model our students may have to face, where we hear rumors that we may have to go to distance learning sometime later in the fall. 
We fully believe that by using google classroom no matter what we will be able to make that seamless transition to distance learning should we need- 
and we are well prepared, as opposed to when the crisis first happened, and most school districts were really just grasping at straws, 
but we also know that the accountability is something that is very important to our students very important to our community and especially to our students who are at the high school level. 
As I said before, google classroom will be utilized for communication at both the building principle and classroom teacher level. 
We really want to make sure that parents are on one medium so that parents can see any communication, email messages, lessons etc, and at this time We are going to enforce, to ensure for the safety of We staff and other students that any sort of instruction that is done on google classroom or virtually that our students adhere to our district code of conduct. 
When students this year sign on families sign on to look at schedules, families will be asked and prompted to sign off on certain measures around this. 
I just wanted to share with you some of our pictures that john 
and I took as we went around in we walkthroughs. 
These are some samples of our our elementary classrooms. 
Again, they're, not decorated, yet, of course, but you can see that we have removed a lot of the traditional. 
You know, wonderful items that we would see in a classroom, but again we really wanted to maximize space and ensure that the teacher had space in the front of where their smart boards are and then also making sure that kids had room and were not. 
You know pushed up too too much, so we still are adjusting that once every single classroom is created at the building level, we will be returning mr o'keefe and I, with we team, to just ensure that everybody has space both the teacher in the front of the room and then students around. 
So again, we are fortunate here. 
we do believe that we have enough staff to move forward and should the numbers for remote learning ensure even more flexibility. 
We may be able to open up more sections in our elementary schools and at We secondary levels, bringing back more secondary students. 
This is at one more of the elementary school and to the right there. 
You will see a classroom at the secondary level.. 
This particular sample is where we marked it the a and b desks, so that students will be sitting 
and then it will make it a little bit easier for cleaning at night for our custodial staff.. 
This is this is also a little bit of a tough share here, because I know that we've been getting a lot of questions about child care and upk. 
First, child care: we are still going to be providing am npm child care by boce by scope, educational services. 
They continue to offer right now child care throughout the pandemic for our essential workers, and They are happy to move forward to offer this services for all of our students. 
At this point, though, we are on hold for we upk program, and that is not because we don't have the space or 
we don't want to, but we simply have not received the allocations yet from the state, and that is how we are able to run we we upk program. 
While we do have many students who do a tuition based into our our upk program, it is simply not enough to substantiate our our upk program. 
Should we not get the allocations, so we are advising parents at this time. 
I know I've. 
I've answered many phone calls many emails if you are need, if you need care, if you would like your child to go to an alternate preschool now is the time to seek that out just to be safe. 
However, if we were to find out about the allocations tomorrow, we would also be able to implement that. 
You know moving forward, so we have not changed anything we're not changing any spaces at this time, we're just kind of on a standstill but to be safe. 
we just encourage you to look just in case. 
Excuse me, ms hines, yes. 
Actually, since we last spoke earlier today, I spoke to mr duffy, he's the executive director of scope and runs our upk program just trying to see if he's heard anything further about our our upk program and he has not heard much more than we have. 
As a matter of fact, there was a meeting earlier in the day with the suffolk county, superintendents, as well as mr wix who's, the regional superintendent for eastern suffolk boces, to see what boces knew about upk funding and again their contacts in albany have been very, very quiet on it. 
The only information they've received is, you know, floating a balloon from albany that they're considering opening upk up, but they may only fund it at 80 percent of what the grant would be. 
So that would mean if the district wanted to move forward. 
That would be an expense that was not budgeted for and we'd have to make a determination. 
You know to take those monies from elsewhere to support our our upk program, so it sounds like they're getting closer to a final decision, but I'd have to keep the border prize, so it might be a model in which we'd have to support 20 of the program to make it move forward. 
So I'll keep you posted on that. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe,, and then on to now our boces cte program. 
So those are our students because we do have two. 
We have cte programs that we house We. 
They will still remain on the a b schedule, but the but the bose cte programs, where students get on the bus and go to boces. 
Boces did alert us last week that they will be providing that in house they do have the room 
so that will be live every day and for those students 
we will still have busing from our high schools to and from the program. 
We at this time, though, say that We may need family support in terms of if your child might need a ride to school if they are going to the program in the afternoon or alternately. 
That is, that is not solidified. 
Mr o'keefe and mr savone are looking at that through transportation to see if we might be able to accommodate and pick up individual students at their homes. 
That would only be for those choosing remote learning right. 
Only those choosing remotely. 
Thank you,,. 
So here I just. 
I share the hyperlinks that you will see on on the presentation that that we've sent home for the sake of time, I'm not going to go through all of these links, but the top is a sample of our health screening form and the bottom of our all the protocol visuals a sample of them that we have smattered around every single building and so for we next steps. 
As we said this morning, we finished we planning committee meeting where we laid out the the final steps here with our district leaders and our volunteers. 
Our board of education, pres presentation is, is now as you can see, and then we also have a live community forum on monday at seven o'clock and we will be live streaming it. 
Similarly here, however, I would envision that we would be a little closer that so that you can see we a little bit more clear, but on friday we will be sending out a survey just asking community members for questions that community members have. 
We will collate those into subject areas and we will look to our best answer. 
Any questions that you have as well as our building administration will be delivering a common q, a sort of like fact sheet about further details pertaining to to the buildings, and this will include sample schedules for all of our students- orientations how those will go out for our grade six on our grade nine. 
Some of that will be virtual and some of that will still be activities just broken up into smaller increments at the building, as well as arrival and dismissal times and bell schedules for secondary students and then, lastly, as governor cuomo had ordered on friday, we are in the process of updating our district website for protocols for any symptomatic individuals testing. 
We are not responsible per se for testing We, but We are responsible for offering a plan. 
Should a student or a staff member go home, a student or a staff member are required to go, get testing where that could occur, and then, of course, a student or a staff member can't come back into school until testing results have been provided and then contact tracing as well.. 
So that is the end of our presentation this evening. 
We look forward to speaking and sharing some more and clarifying more for you, as the rest of the night goes on and then on monday, as well at seven o'clock. 
Did I my apologies. 
Let me go back. 
I 
I didn't realize that I think I got caught up in what we were saying about upk before, so my apologies. 
These are some additional details about our secondary return and again, with the utmost priority being the social and emotional well-being of our students. 
In grades. 
Six to eight we will be benchmarking for eli. 
We do that through a literacy management system that we have and also for math. 
All of our math departments have benchmarking type assessments that All of our math departments do in the beginning of the year and again this will be to identify present learning levels in grades, seven to 12 curriculum adjustments may be made for applicable areas where prior learning needs to be had so, for example, in our math and our science classes, there may need to be some learning from the prior year's regents bearing class, and so we would be looking to look at curriculum around that and possibly offer review classes for our students as well again, traditional grading will return. 
Students may not share, so we will be limiting textbook use 
and we'll be taking advantage of all of the online subscriptions that we have physical education again. 
Very much like elementary school will be a mix of the gym outside fields and other large area 
use instrumental lessons very similar to elementary. 
We are working with that department to ensure that lessons will occur. 
They do need to be 12 feet if They are wind and or choral in nature, and again we will be looking to figure out ways in order to still offer those choral groups, but in a modified version google classroom will continue to be utilized for communication with both the principal and the classroom teacher again for a seamless transition should we ever be ordered into distance learning. 
Lockers will mostly be used for am and pickup 
only that's not to say that if a student really needed to go back, we would not allow them to, but again just trying to minimize the flow and minimize how much our students are putting into the lockers. 
So we would envision some form of outerwear
, that's appropriate for that time and modified or or very. 
You know slight binders and or folders notebooks that they need stagger grades again in times of at the end of the period. 
We would be announcing grades so that they can come out into the hallways, so that would mean that we would be at the end of the period starting it a little bit earlier, so that we can allow each grade level to disperse into the hallway to their next period.
, sorry about that. 
So that still is the end of our presentation. 
We hope that this did clarify some further information for you. 
We are appreciative of the support and the time that the community offered We to be able to digest everything and wait for the orders, so We can bring this to you tonight. 
Thank you. 
Questions from the board questions from the board. 
Is anybody, jim, a john on the upk right now? 
The way that's funded is. 
Correct me. 
If I'm wrong, like a six hundred thousand dollar grant, primarily we get a six hundred thousand dollar grant. 
We hold a lottery that allots 252 families a spot in the program we have more interest than that annually, but families beyond the 253 are able to participate for the same rate, which is about twenty four hundred dollars per family for the year. 
So if, if the governor would give us 80 percent of that, that would mean that the district would have to come up with a hundred and twenty thousand dollars correct. 
But are you in that hundred twenty thousand dollars? 
Are we counting that that the lottery people are not paying tuition? 
That would still be the lottery people not paying right, so, in other words, the 120 000 could be reduced if the lottery people were willing to pay a tuition fee.
, that was a model the board chose to go with.
,, thank you just to figure back on what security was saying if they were to to to. 
Take twenty percent of that we'd be looking at about 479 thousand. 
Two hundred is what we'll be looking at, which is what accommodate 201 kids. 
You were saying that you were concerned that we, we might not be able to raise the funds to be able to. 
You know, manage the program and have enough you know what I mean. 
You'd have to redo the lottery. 
Then I I wouldn't I don't know. 
If would necessity, would you want to use the same number then cut the same number off?
, I set off at just 201 
and then and then open it up at 237.69 per per family per month. 
We could examine any model that the board wanted to take a look at. 
Certainly those other families had already been notified that they were among the families chosen for the free program. 
That's the worst. 
The worst case scenario would be correct, but let's say they take all the funding and, and they don't and one of the concerns to have it 
I mean have we thought about reaching out to some of our state elected officials, flanagan or doug smith, to find out if they can get us clarification from the governor's office as to whether or not he's going to fight, we can certainly continue to reach out. 
Quite honestly, during much of this crisis, much of them have been rather silent. 
we haven't been able to get a lot of information. 
the governor isn't sharing much with other people other than when the governor decides to put it out via press conference, I mean. 
Normally, our local representatives are very helpful in getting information for us. 
Unfortunately, hadn't been able to get information for us, but it's certainly worth trying. 
I mean us're two weeks before the start of school 
and you've got 252 families, not knowing whether or not 252 families have a pre-k. 
I mean I don't know, you know how the board feels, but 
I personally think that you would get 252 families, even if they took all 599 000, because at 237 a month for half day pre-k, it's still a great great opportunity sure- 
and I can't and now more than ever and and would be willing to work with us if there was zero funding 
and we had enough participation to still run the program. 
would can we include something like that in the survey sits some of the families out there to see what the interests would be. 
We could do a separate survey. 
I wouldn't want to you know not on the same survey. 
put it out as a separate survey, specifically targeted to those families that are already in the process. 
I have a follow-up to that. 
Where are we putting all these students if our classes are maxed out at this time we still have not reappropriated those classes. 
We do have a couple of buildings because of additional special education sections that we needed, that we moved the classes, but we have not taken away those class spaces. 
Yet so, if we were to go with the will of the board to you know, put out a survey and go with a tuition base, we would be you know all set to go: hi. 
I just had a quick question about the bus and what is the busing going to look like I mean again
, it'll also depend on participation. 
You know we put out a survey to the parents a week or so ago. 
I think we had nine thousand respondents in in very brief order. 
in that survey about a third of the families considered, possibly keeping their children home of the two-thirds willing to send their children children in 65 of those said their children would use the bus. 
The other 35 said their children would drive their children children to school. 
So just some quick, math you're only looking at say, 4 500, kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers. 
I mean they could change when we put out the new survey, and it could be that you know parents first stop that they don't want to use the bus and then during the year. 
Maybe they start. 
You know they need the bus. 
So we're not reducing the number of bus runs. 
All the runs that have been budgeted for would be running, but with those numbers you'd end up literally with just about one child per seat. 
You know so 
and then you also take into account 
remote you'll get routed for 44 students. 
So in the worst case scenario there could be two pupils in each seat, but based on the information we're receiving, I don't think there'll be that participation.
, just some clarification so with the custodial staff cleaning each night, so 
they're going to have more to do than they did prior. 
Have we increased the custodial staff since their job description will be different to do a more deeper cleaning every day daily versus. 
Unfortunately, that was one of the items that was pulled back on the budget, so obviously we may need to take a look at that again we were rating 10 custodians and then, when there was issues where we even today, we still don't know what our state funding is 
and we still have the potential of a looming. 
20 percent cut, we decided. 
If you remember back to january and february, we were talking about this. 
we were adding one extra custodian, each building right. 
That was one of we enhancements for this year's budget. 
we did draw that back, so we're going to work with the staff. 
we have work with the substitute staff we have, and you know it as best as possible to optimize cleaning, and then with the secondary schools, where you have the a b desks next to each other. 
So that means, if I am an a student and I sit in only the a 
and then the next day, the b desk comes in. 
That image might change, though I was going to say that that was really more so that we can show a visual to the families, how we were spacing it out in the beginning, 
those desks we would see needing to be reappropriated and put into our our lunchrooms different other areas where we're going to need to reappropriate other space, the library different items like that. 
So I don't. 
I don't necessarily think we were just at north today and in the classrooms that we walked around in with miss trombetta. 
There was only about 15 to 16 desks in in each classroom: 
okay. 
That was an initial setup when we were trying to figure out what it would look like or how we could divide them up. 
But in fact, with the style of cafeteria tables, we have it. 
it really prohibits the number of children that can eat in the cafeteria. 
We believe We're going to take all the cafeteria tables out of those secondary cafeterias and store them and put in desks. 
I mean it's not going to be the most attractive. 
Lunchroom it'll be set up more like a testing room where children will be spaced six feet apart right with classroom desks correct, but we do anticipate that we would be able to offer breaks, for you know, students to be able to go outside and go into any of the recreation areas, 
items like that elimination and so then in the secondary schools. 
If the kids are changing classrooms will the desk get wiped down between each change or how does that work in the cafeteria?,,, not in the classrooms that would that would technically be not possible. 
I mean there's 3 000 desks in high school and 1600 or so in in a middle school. 
That just wouldn't be the means in that four or five minutes of passing to wipe down those tables. 
But if we student would want to do their own destiny, the materials will be in the classroom right. 
We are providing that for every classroom. 
and then one last question., everybody! 
It's okay! 
If a staff or a student happens to test positive, that would then be reported, and then the cdc would guide us on what us had to do or us have us own plan. 
How does that work? 
The department of health, the department of health department of health? 
So The department of health, the department of health department of health would tell us so if it's one student in one classroom 
right that may be different than a student in a middle school who passes through a hall or mrs clayton's, become an expert on the matter.
, so the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require us to make reports for certain things and the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require the medical treatment provider. 
The doctor who's performed the diagnosis for a positive result to report information to reporting for contact tracing. 
So therefore, our obligation we go above and beyond to make sure that, even if, for some reason, the medical treatment provider has not contacted the contact tracing, we will just check you know belt and suspenders that we have provided some insight in case 
there's an instance. 
The other thing is when the lab results come back. 
the lab results are supposed to be also provided to the contact tracing, at which point the department of health would be or enter cdc would be contacting tracers and determining who they would contact, including students or staff or family or whoever they came into contact with. 
Can I can I pick you back on that question quick?, thank you very much so on the checklist that we do daily. 
Let's just say rob 
and I are in a classroom 
and I find out that he test positive for covid the next day when my parents are filling out the check sheet and it says, have you come in contact with anybody? 
That's tested positive? 
Will that prevent my entrance into the building? 
If you're saying you tested positive, if you're saying you're tested right?
, I mean, I'm, not gonna, tell you that rob testifies we're not allowed to tell you 
I mean I came to learn it. 
it becomes common knowledge of who it was, and now I have to honestly fill out the sheet 
I mean I'm have to now have to say.
, I did come into contact with some of the department of health guidelines for close contact, and this is where it gets a little squirrelly because you know, are we in close contact? 
Are we in close contact? 
Their criteria for close contact is less than six feet for 15 minutes or more, so we'll have to look at each of those one at a time, and I can foresee the department of health as soon as schools open, you know, becoming overwhelmed with calls from districts all around the state just trying to get feedback and answers, so we're building criteria and protocols with we nursing staff with we personnel staff. 
You know, so we can make some of these decisions on we own. 
We have handled situations already, even during summer school programs. 
So it's not that we're unfamiliar with how to do it. 
We've had staff members with with covid, so it's just going to be on a bigger scale. 
Now, that's all, and also just to mention, mr block is with us this evening from ingram and smith. 
He has been our one of our main contacts that we've been triaging information between the state, the federal, what we have in our schools, what we can do and what we can't do and trying to find the best scenario for our students and we staff 
and we'll continue to do so, and I promise this is my last question. 
So if a parent chooses the remote learning,, they have to commit to that for the year. 
they can't change they mind like after the first marking period, they're committing to that 
and then they student cannot participate in, let's say spring sports,, so, I think in in the beginning of the guidance, it said that students may not be able to may not be able to enter into activities or sports. 
We know now that that is not the case and that if a child is remote, they're still a student of ours, we're not really going to have any activities. 
So we don't foresee that being an issue. 
So it's really more for sports, but miss trombetta who sits on. 
The community. 
Four section has shared with us information in terms of how they're looking at that language and how we would not be prohibited most likely from keeping children back from sports in september, and then the child plays a spring sport and then come the spring. 
Sports are up and running and you tell the child they can't play, and just know that when we write that we're looking to make it more of a commitment that could be up to a year. 
That is because we don't want to give the misnomer that if a child says well, I want you know a family to say that they want to be remote in a week 
and then they change they mind. 
they want to do it another week. 
We will look at each case, but it would be very challenging for We to bring back large numbers of students who think who feel they might have made a poor choice, because that would shift all of our classrooms and all of our teaching staff.
, I would totally agree with that. 
I just didn't know if it would be like after every marking period reevaluated, but if the parent does commit, I just don't want to hurt the student of course by saying. 
If extracurricular comes back in spring, your parent made this choice in september, and now you can't participate right 
and I think for us, you know being just of mine- that things could shift very easily. 
We could look to look at that come january 
and it may not need to be a year-long commitment, but we did want to write it down so that parents were aware all right. 
Thank you very much. 
Thank you for sharing this with us. 
I have two questions or concerns. 
When this plan was developed to return to school k through five the ada b day, this plan wasn't based on surveys that went out as to the number of parents that think they would choose remote or not choose remote. 
It was based on our entire population.
, so conceivably, if we have a, a 6 through 12 model of a day b day, hypothetically every parent said, I want my kids to return to school. 
We can. 
We can accommodate all of them in an ajb day. 
You mean physically back into school.
, we wouldn't be able to do that. 
How would we physically bring them all back? 
We don't have so at the elementary level, just very simple, math. 
We have to take out about five to six, seven kids out of each classroom in order to be able to accommodate that average size. 
My question a little bit on the six through twelve model--,, it that was based upon returning every single child to school. 
So if friday, the survey is if we have if we have more children now I understand you. 
Thank you. 
So if we have more children who are going to be on remote, we could conceivably- 
and I know we discussed this this morning in we committee- 
we could look to bring back more students. 
My question is that my concern is the same as laura is having a one-year commitment. 
I received a half a dozen phone calls today,, probably in the last couple hours about I'm concerned about the one-year commitment we know.
, that you know in remote learning it says remote instruction is not equivalent to in-person hybrid instruction right
, so it's not the same level right so for forcing kids out of school. 
What we're doing is we're creating a bigger educational gap for the following year.
, we're not forcing that would be a parent's choice, but the thing is we allow them to come back after each quarter.
, if we're able to accommodate them according to the way the plan was designed. 
Why wouldn't we allow them come back after after one quarter, so them can get that? 
I didn't think we said that we wouldn't be allowing we said that it would be really prohibitive for we to be able to reschedule them back into classrooms, but we could look at it based on the numbers that we have. 
We wanted to be honest, mr scavo, and let families know that this could be a year-long commitment, and most districts are looking at that at either january or the year long, because it is very disruptive that would mean having to up just move around the entire schedule for. 
You know our schools, which we may still have to do, should covert restrictions be lifted, but you wouldn't want to recant, and we know that that happened quite a bit where, in the beginning of all this debacle, we were putting out information 
and then something you know, alternatively, was shared, but I think we just said before with miss slattery, that, of course, if we could look at it by quarter and we felt like it wasn't going to be a tremendous feat for our families that we would do that. 
But I think that that's not probably what a parent is going to make their choice on if I'm choosing to be remote. 
It's because I'm thinking that it's unsafe for my child to be at school. 
So I'm hoping that by these presentation, slides that we have 
people will see that we've made tremendous tremendous. 
You know strides in making sure that our schools are safe, our schools're, clean 
and we're doing routine protocols to ensure that, but the commitment is a year. 
That's what this time for right! 
Now!
, so if something changes at home a person, that's furloughed now has to go back to work right, they want to and they they impression is going to be that they can't return because they signed the paper saying that they have a one-year commitment to be at. 
But I mean I think, though if, if there's something along those lines- 
and we all get those calls all the time, if there's a family, that really is in enough need and feels like they made the poor choice or not a poor choice. 
they made the wrong choice for what they they thing is. 
Going on right now, so whether a parent goes back, furloughed or they child is just not doing well in remote learning and they were to contact us just like any other parent phone call that we would have. 
Of course, we would look at every case individually, but I'm talking as a whole. 
We could not say you're going to be a remote 
and then, if you choose to decide in masses that you want to come back, We just would not be able to run the same schedule 
and then We would be restarting everything over again. 
The reason why I bring this up is: I watched the the newsday webinar yesterday we had dr johnson. 
I finally heard all about johnson. 
I got a chance to see johnson in the presentation, along with a psychiatrist along with a the superintendent of north babylon, and that exact question came up right and a lot of the experts were saying. 
I would not go past a semester. 
In fact, a lot of districts are going quarterly, you know- 
and I just don't. 
I just don't want to influence a person's decision because they're fearful that, if they sign that paper they're not going to be able to come back because the reality of it is
, is that you know when we look at the education of even a day b day. 
My concern is that, as a teacher, you can't teach the entire curriculum and now we're talking about prior learning being re-taught from the previous year, how you and you're never going to be able to teach the the entire curriculum, but the kids that at home that are not getting the same. 
Equivalency of education are going to be further behind the following year and which all we're going to do is create a a snowball effect and that's my concern. 
I mean you know I personally would like you know the opportunity that, if they, if they come back after, if they're the first quarter, which is a 10-week period or nine-week period, I think it would be a little more settling for the people in the community. 
Knowing that all right, this remote's not learning I committed to a year now, I'm stuck well
, I mean, I think I think two things right, because I agree with you. 
I don't think anybody wants to be in the position where we can't welcome back students interchangeably as students need, and we definitely know that, no matter what happens. 
Curriculum is going to be interrupted this year. 
That is a safe bet, but if we play, if it's the will of the board, if it's the will of the board to change that- 
and you would like to make that language more flexible, we're happy to do that. 
But know that we've taken, you know quite a concealed amount of time to making sure we would prefer we students not to be on remote, but if a family really chooses and needs to choose that we honor and we respect that absolutely. 
But, I mean nobody wants to do that, but nobody's the size of sagem either, and so we have different restrictions. 
That's why the question was the plan design based on the entire it was. 
It was based on of if all students were going to be a full return, then we would have to go in an a b day if we are finding, though, that we have remote students at a quantity where we can bring back students even an additional day or or by grade level seniors. 
First, ninth graders. 
First, you know. 
However, we look to plan through that. 
Then that's would be our next step. 
So just what we were saying earlier in we remote instruction, it's going to be hard to match up what exactly the model will look like until we have the survey results from our teachers and for our families, so we can match it up certification-wise. 
My biggest concern is we have kids taking ap exams and getting those kids ready for that and getting those kids ready for the next level college. 
You know we. 
We have training as much face time with with staff. 
It's absolutely. 
I agree with you 
and I'm very 
I'm very thankful. 
You know working with the scta if we ever have to think about distance learning the fact that we'll be providing two and a half hours every day for our students so running the same schedule, just shortened periods. 
You know working on google classroom interchangeably now and consistently across all of our classrooms. 
You know just right now. 
Currently we have a tremendous amount of teachers that are undergoing pd, virtually to ensure that everything is is up and running and that they feel clarified and supported in that kind of work, but you're preaching to the choir. 
I couldn't agree with you more that this is a really challenging time. 
I have a high schooler myself 
and she's in a smaller district, doing an a b schedule. 
So I scratch my head a lot right now, so I I completely respect and understand and if the board would like us to look at the year-long date, just let us know and us'd be happy to accommodate.
, this this will go the, remote learning actually just went out. 
That survey just went out, but us 
can I mean I could send it on on. 
On remind in five minutes, if us wanted to say you know that us've changed the date, but it sounds like. 
Maybe that needs to be more of a discussion if we're looking to go that route meredith engine and then jimmy so on the remote learning. 
If a parent were to choose that model, I understand that we would want them to commit for the full year, because we are devoting staff just to that remote learning we're not using a teacher who may be inside the classroom, sometimes we're going to utilize the staff that, for whatever reason, has to be staying at home to be our remote teachers. 
That's the optimal plan, so at the elementary level, it works a little bit easier in that in that fashion. 
If I'm an elementary teacher and I'm out, I can conceivably teach any of those grade levels 
if I'm a librarian, obviously that certification, et cetera et cetera, it gets a little trickier at the secondary level, because if I'm a chemistry, teacher 
and 
and I'm out- 
and maybe I don't have as many students out for chemistry- 
you know- 
then what am I giving to that teacher in terms of work that they would be doing for that day. 
So one could say that she would switch what they're doing 
and now they're going to teach more science electives and they can support any of those students who are out needing science electives. 
So it's really going to boil down to looking at the hard numbers of students matched up with the teachers that we have. 
Should we not be able to match everybody up which 
I'm hopeful we will be able to, then we would need to start entering into some sort of live streaming or larger groups of google classrooms, where a teacher, instead of having a class of maybe 25 or 26 in a google classroom, we may have to have larger numbers, and 
so then that's why the year-long decision, or not doing it every quarter becomes very challenging for us. 
If I'm a teacher 
and I'm running a google classroom of 45 kids and 
now some that those classrooms want to go back
, what classroom are they going into? 
Where am I fitting they into 
so then you're having to change people's schedule? 
It's a lot of moving parts, it is and then, if, so we have 
so children are able to through children parents, choose whether children want to come back to school or not. 
Our teachers are not electing whether Our teachers're coming back to school. 
The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning are the teachers that have reasons why The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning cannot return, and so, even if tomorrow, you know three weeks after school started, all of our remote learners said well. 
This is for the birds. 
I don't like this. 
I want to go back to school. 
We wouldn't then have the ability to bring them back, because, even though We did the classrooms for them, We wouldn't at that point, have the ability. 
Would we not at this time, because again, with six feet, we are, you know down to the amount of numbers that we have, 
but if, if our numbers look as such, where the remote learning is a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms, let's say, for example, instead of them being 17, that might only be 13 or 14. 
So then we could start welcoming them back, but that would be based on almost you know, looking at each student individually and being able to see how we can schedule them back into school, which is probably a very physical impossibility in the next three weeks. 
It's a little hard with our secondary schools as a as a secondary mom. 
It is it it kind of does stink 
and there's no two ways about it: our children, no child, is going to get the best education this year. 
It's just not going to happen and something we're going to try we best 
we'll. 
Definitely try our best right. 
If one, let's say somerset had an influx of you know. 
80 percent of their kids wanted to stay home and remote learn that would open up a lot more room, but it wouldn't necessarily mean that we would do somerset where their children win every single day and the rest of their., we would be making decisions that are consistent for all students, but then we might be reappropriating staff to help out in other ways in other areas, and I don't want to put you on the spot, but it's okay. 
That's why we're here 
we're on the spot? 
Have we looked into sixth grade at all, because in my opinion sixth grade is that lost grade? 
It's a grade where they're a little too young to still stay home by they and not only just stay home for the day by they, but also teach they kind of you know get on this get on the schedule 
get on the computer. 
Do what you got to do? 
Keep yourself moving on that b day. 
Have we visited something that once we get all our numbers, because I know we can't really finalize anything until we get all these surveys and numbers, but once we get all those numbers, are we going to be able to maybe look at sixth grade going every day as a possibility?
, that's absolutely you know
, that's definitely a conversation that we've been having as as soon as we know what the numbers are. 
Will we be able to welcome back additional grades, and I would I would assume that we would be having these conversations with with all of you, our administrative team, obviously as well and sixth grade is one of those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off at, because we know that they could be 10 11 years old going into school, and I would not feel comfortable myself at times, leaving my child home for long periods,, and so, we've had those conversations and once we know the numbers we'll be able to come back and report if we're able to make any changes good. 
Thank you. 
So much, no problem, just a quick question. 
Some clarification!, piggybacking a little bit on what mr scavo said. 
Are we entering the year making an assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver 100 of content in regards to secondary curriculum? 
If that is the assumption that I think you said that we're almost entering into, I mean who's going to choose what topics and what's being covered. 
Are we letting different teachers different people it just it concerns me that we're entering, 
I know, there's no perfect answer and there's no scenario that can right that, under these circumstances that you've, given you 
but. 
I guess that makes more of mr scala's point is that if we're making the assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver content, we should be trying to wait till so many surveys come back and see how many kids we can actually get 
and. 
So right, I don't have a perfect answer for it, but I can tell you what we're doing to set up for that. 
I had a chair meeting a couple of weeks ago, so our instructional leaders in each department to talk about that, especially at the secondary level, and so we would be looking at our curriculum at what are the big ideas at the end of the school year. 
What is it that the students are expected to learn so the students can. 
You know move forward and pass those classes and or regence exams, we're also hoping to have a little bit more guidance in terms of the state education department in terms of what they're going to do in relaxing standards and curriculum and testing so much in how they had canceled the regents. 
We don't hope for that. 
We hope more for choice so that these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents. 
If they want to take it and see what kind of grade they get, I don't, I don't think we're looking. 
I don't think- 
and I know 
you mean it this way, but we're not assuming we're not going to be able to get through we curriculum, but we want to be real with we families. 
our curriculum could look a little bit different than what our curriculum normally does, and I know our teachers again hard workers are already looking at that. 
We've had some conversation, for example around science lab hours, usually that's seat time 
now the state education department has relaxed that, and that could be also a virtual. 
So we've already started those conversations once we come back into. 
Schools in our department means that we've been having anyway, virtually we'll continue those talks and start looking at that together. 
So this at the secondary level state the new york state, creates the standards for apn regions 
right so haven't. 
Given us clarification, okay, is through is through the college board, and so us actually are, starting, as you know, a new ap capstone program at the high school, so those teachers that are gonna begin teaching it for us this year they just went through the training for that 
and right now, ap is holding tight to what they're doing, but we also know that at the last minute they made some changes around what they did: testing wise, virtually. 
So we are advocating- 
and I think mr o'keefe spoke about this earlier- while we have not heard a tremendous amount from our legislators at this time we have been advocating, through we local boces, our associations talking to talking to the college board and just hoping for some teamwork for relief, so that families know that you know we're not looking to make any decisions that are going to make impacts for the students, but we also have to be real and they have to work with we. 
So we're hopeful for that. 
No problem, aaron, the so by the weekend we will have the figures on how many people are opting for remote learning. 
Is that,, 
all and the way we have it now is they're being committed. 
they can make a commitment for one full year, just just for my identification. 
Let's suppose it came back to say 30 percent of our district, one, which could be right, which could be what it could be sure. 
What does that change? 
Anything for us with the ab days or or or as meredith said, the sixth grade situation would, let's say, 30 remote for the year. 
Would that change? 
You know what we're doing right now.
, absolutely so what I just said with business. 
Also gonna take you know. 
Where is the thirty percent? 
It could be heavily weighted on the younger children.
, you know, is a k12 pet families deciding they want to keep them home right. 
You know it really depends on the breakdown of the of the groupings and the grades of where that 30 percent is or is it leaning more on one side of the district versus the other, it's not as clean as just if it was thirty percent, but, spaced across the district. 
That would make it easier. 
We can see some movement, I'm just not sure that I could say for sure right now that it would be at the secondary level. 
We would just need to see where it is and just aggregate that and just look at it, and it also boils down to to you know certification areas too, as well. 
How much staff we have in in each area? 
I fully understand mr scala's position on that. 
I really do understand, but I'm trying to trying to look at this, as if you put out a survey tonight which is already gone, but if you put it out- 
and it said your one mocking period 
and you could change your mind, then kind of I would say that you really 
we're stuck with what we've got this is. 
This is the way it's got to be because you don't know from market period of marketing period, how many students you're going to have. 
Is that accurate? 
I mean, 
but, but that goes to back to what we said. 
we can't put out there that you can make the decision after each quarter. 
If we're not sure we're going to be able to offer that- 
and so I know it may have looked like it- was a little bit stricter than it sounds like the board was- was willing to move forward with 
and so again we're certainly open to putting in alternate language, and we could send it as as quick as you know, as soon as we're done here or first thing in the morning. 
I certainly don't want to prohibit anybody from not doing remote learning but again, it's it's. 
We have to be practical in the size of our school district, so we can't say We're going to be able to offer things that smaller school districts can right away, but it is prohibitive based on on the numbers. 
So,, we might be able to offer that and we might be able to offer more grades into our secondary schools. 
We might be able to offer more space for our elementary students. 
We just won't know until We see all of those numbers getting to getting that number that we're seeking this weekend will drive where we go next,, and that's why it's challenging to be able to share with we staff and 
with our community what remote learning will you know essentially look like as well? 
If I don't have enough staff, I can't guarantee that you're going to be in a google classroom with a live teacher. 
I might not be able to offer that it may be based on whatever elective or store or grade that you're in it could be some sort of like a live streaming, but 
but again it really. 
It depends on on the numbers of the students that we have up against we staff as well. 
Thank you, jim just just real fast to pick it back. 
I apologize. 
I walked out for a second, if only 75 of the families respond to the survey. 
So now there's 25 of the kids. 
We don't know what they're doing no the default is that they're coming to school.,! 
Thank you no problem, so I know with elementary the teachers. 
Usually take their lunch when the students have their lunch. 
How are we working that, if they're having a lunch in the classroom who will be supervising they so? 
We do have obviously aid support. 
We are also working with We principals because We know that We're probably going to need some additional help with that, but We also know that. 
You know that lunch is managed. 
I actually thought that there was some staff that was a part of the lunch periods that might be mistaken. 
I'd have to look at that, but We are. 
We are having conversation to ensure that We have the support We need for lunch, two more. 
Actually. 
What will clubs look like virtually? 
So that's 
that's another new and exciting question 
right. 
We definitely know that clubs are not going to be able to be maintained after school physically. 
We have started to work with an online platform called passport for good and it allows clubs to run virtually and note on all their activities attendance community service hours if a child is working any of those types of hours. 
So we have to enter into conversation with our teachers about what that could look like. 
we certainly don't want to not offer clubs, but you know once a week twice a week: what sort of activities? 
How will you meet with them? 
Will google me be a part of it? 
Those are the questions that we're looking to have moving forward around clubs and one more with the staggered start times. 
Those are students still changing for gym class. 
We will not be changing for gym and We will not need to because We have moved team sports to the end and we're looking to do more. 
You know personal fitness that isn't rigorous, but we would not. 
We would not be looking to have any any. 
You know contact in that manner for our students 
[Music]. As I sat here tonight. 
I thought about saying absolutely nothing 
and I really don't know where to begin. 
I don't have a specific question. 
I can tell you that I'm incredibly angry internally right now 
and it's not at anybody in this room, but 
I thought that, I haven't organized my thoughts completely they're. 
Just bouncing around in my head, but I want to say a few things. 
First, I want to say that you did an outstanding job in the most difficult of circumstances. 
You've put together a plan. 
Every school district is in the same exact boat that we are in questions asked tonight by rob, alex laura meredith everybody here great questions, and we don't have the answers to any of those questions and we are going to be surprised. 
I think greatly by the things that we find. 
I think that you know people could look at what's going on here tonight and 
people may think that all of us agree on this model and think that this is what we have to do. 
I'm sure there are people watching this tonight streaming or 
we'll watch it later on 
and they'll think that if you're sitting here, I'm sitting here 
and I'm quiet that I must agree with this plan- 
and I think it's wonderful 
and I'm going to tell you that I do
n't it's rotten, it's a rotten plan. 
That's going to do tremendous damage to our children. 
I've been teaching for over 22 years. 
Now I can remember when I started there was goals 2000., maybe some people in the room. 
Remember that maybe you don't, then there was no child left behind and then most recently there was common core there's, never a time in which it seems like a bad idea, 
can't come about a bunch of garbage and nonsense that does anything but improves the education of our children. 
As I sat here tonight and I watch that slideshow 
and I watch those desks sitting so far apart. 
I thought what kind of dystopian period of time have we entered into where we look at this, and we accept this as the quote-unquote, what I hate to say the new normal, it's not normal to me. 
It's not acceptable to me. 
I want you to know that if it were up to me solely, I would defy the governor. 
I would send all of our children back to back to school. 
I would give all of our children that opportunity. 
I believe that his edicts are completely unrealistic in terms of delivering a sound education to our children and I believe they are not well-based in terms of research and data and so on. 
So when we look at how many children have ended up with covid and what's happened to how many children, there's no question that covet exists. 
In my mind, I lost one friend to it. 
I almost lost a second several who had it very badly who thought they might lose they lives. 
So there's no question that covet exists. 
However, when I look at the numbers and when I look at children getting covered, what I see is that our response is disproportionate to what is going on and we are willing to just fall in line and listen to the leadership of this state, this country and do these things- 
and I know there are people who feel like me, and I know there are people who don't feel like me, a third of the survey respondents who have said I'm not comfortable sending my child to school, and I am all about parental choice. 
If you do not feel comfortable sending your child to school, then I encourage you not to I encourage you to homeschool. 
I encourage you to use the remote option if you're not comfortable with that. 
However, I feel, like I've, been denied my choice, which is to send my child to school. 
I'm willing to tolerate that risk based upon what I know, because I think that the damage being done to my child that still is in in school and the damage being done to other children is tremendous. 
I taught remotely for the last what three four months of school 
and when I tell you that I did as good of a job as anyone could do with live instruction every single day. 
All right. 
I worked very hard to do what I did and I watched kids slide into the great abyss and some of those children that I watched slide are supposed to go off. 
The princeton this fall are supposed to go to. 
Cornell are supposed to go to. 
You know you name the school 
and 
and they're going columbia and so on. 
But yet I've watched each one of they slip 
and I've watched a few hold on, 
and I've watched the most needy students that I taught completely slip
, we're not getting that back. 
we are not, and here we are and here's where we're going 
so I'll leave on this particular note. 
Sometimes it's real easy to just go along 
and I feel terrible for people like you, folks, the administration here
, it's simple and I'm in the same boat as an educator. 
It's my job! 
It's how I support my family and live my life and as a result of that, I'm forced to comply, because if I don't I'm out of a job but the solutions, we've come up with they're, not good solutions, they're, terrible solutions, and they are solutions that are going to harm each and every one of our children. 
And at some point I do believe that people who feel the way that I feel are going to have to think long and hard about how we stand up and demand what we want for we children that we think is best. 
I just want to say before I ask my last two questions that was well said bill. 
I I feel exactly the same. 
we do so well said. 
I just want to talk about the boces, because we're also feeling some questions today about boces. 
As I mentioned earlier in the meeting community meeting where there was only 50 people in that meeting,, where there was only 50 people, there was 50 how many people 50 volunteers 
and then all of our staff as well go ahead.
, you know. 
Having worked for boces for going into my 29th year, you know over the decades things change school districts go to block schedule. 
Kings park did at one point: school districts for financial purposes, decided that you know we don't want to send two bus routes to boces. 
we only want to have one route and, as a result,, they basically said to we agency look whirly standing in the am this year, or will he sending seniors in the am and juniors in the pm and they've changed things so that it accommodated he and our bosses always accommodated he and my concern with some of the questions with some of the students that are in cte classes, that are that are scheduled to go to carpentry and auto body, and- 
and you know whatever other programs they signed up for- is that transportation becomes an issue if we have an a day b day, those particular subject areas you have to be there every day you can't teach somebody how to sand the fender and paint the fender remotely. 
It's just not something that can happen, so I suggested earlier that maybe we should call boces, eastern south post and say look we pay anywhere from 14 to 20 000 tuition depending on the particular student. 
If they have an iep or not or if they need additional services, we can only stand in the am because of the situation. 
We're in you know and get their feedback. 
You know, I don't believe We. 
I don't think they want to lose the tuition.
, I agree and and uh- 
and you know I did appreciate that idea, because I'm not I 
I know you're in western 
but it was just you know, shared with us, the model that they were running, 
and so we traditionally we're share 
we're told what we schedule is, but we are quite large and I agree with you- 
we pay an exorbitant amount of money into both season. 
It's certainly worth the conversation. 
The second thing we have in-house cte classes where we have cosmetology, and you know using the same concept- 
I mean if we have to get we kids there every single day. 
The suggestion that you know we've we've done in you know boces is that we try to allocate you know: 
the junior students first year, students 
the am session this way they could take that bus up every single day right and just have to get a ride home two two days out of the week 
and then the pm students or the second year. 
Students would actually attend cosmetology and pm because many of Students may have driver's license and license. 
It's just another suggestion to be able to accommodate that population of kids. 
That really need to be there five days a week, especially cosmetology students that have licensing and all that stuff which, by the way our cosmetology teacher, I mean she. 
she really just went above and beyond to ensure that the kids had the experience the kids needed, even if it was virtually. 
So I agree with you 
and I do appreciate that feedback 
and then just the last thing is more of a more of a comment 
and it's frustrating because I I hear what bill saying I hear 
and if you don't mind, I really do. 
Mr coggins, I. 
I don't want you to think or anybody to think that we just you know, laid low because of we jobs.. 
I think everybody knows I came from a district where we stood very tall against things that were coming down from the state education department. 
I think when you're talking about health, it's a little bit challenging, but I hope you understand- 
and I hope everyone in the community knows that at no point did. 
I think that I was doing this just because it was my job 
but because I really do want what's best for children like. 
I know all of us here, but I stand just as equally frustrated when you're out and you see people out and about in playgrounds and beaches and and whatnot 
and we're held to you know very different standards. 
But when I tell you that we're working 18, 19 20 hours to make sure we're given the best, I know it's not what we all want, but I do respect what you said 
and I really do appreciate that feedback. 
My last thing is really more of a statement and. 
You know when I look at the guidelines for opening in new york and it seems like they print a new one every week, because they change the rules so crazy,. 
You know you look at they. 
If I can say that you know john, when you said it was cryptic, it really is 
I mean you need to you know you can interpret this 50 differently.
,, but they have a mandatory column and then recommendations for best practices, which I don't understand, but it talks about ensure that social distancing, six feet at least six feet or a physical barrier is maintained between individuals while in school facilities on school grounds, including cafeterias, unless safety or care of activities such as moving equipment or elevating elevators traveling in common areas requires shorter distance of individuals. 
But then number two says: if social distancing is not possible, individuals must wear acceptable face governments
, that's exactly how we interpret what we talked about earlier if we have to move kids back into a classroom. 
The way I interpret this- and maybe legal legal counsel, give me you know 
The way I interpret this- 
and maybe legal legal counsel opinion right is that if we had to move desks closer together, to be able to not be able to, you know, accommodate the social distancing by putting masks on the kids, we would be able to do that 
and that's exactly how we started out we planning. 
If you remember we had looked at, I think it was the massachusetts model where we were looking to at least go no less than three feet 
and when we did that it was like everyone's high fiving each other everyone's coming back. 
This is great and I don't mean to put mr block on the spot, but we did receive guidance from legal and it looked as though that masks were not going to be appropriate alone, but we read the regulations the same as you. 
It was just as disappointing when we found out that was not to be mr o'keefe. 
The other day, you'd mention that if we were able to go three feet, we could accommodate every student. 
Every kid come back. 
Every student we had every building make up a class for three feet, and so we were able to say that if parents felt safe for parents children to return that we were able to do that we hands are very tied. 
In terms of that, and you know again, I don't mean to put you on the spot, mr black, but you may want to jump in then 
it was a few weeks ago where you know we thought that just mask face covering was going to be sufficient. 
If you couldn't maintain the social distancing, but then the governor's office came out and clarified that and said that you have to have that physical barrier and. 
So that then took away we what we thought was we ability to have face masks, but the face coverings are okay in the hallways and the bus.
,,, there's!! 
It's not that's!, nothing makes sense, but that is. 
That's 
that's what we're following so aaron. 
As we all know, I should have had a swivel chair, john I'm just saying. 
Should I have a swivel chair, as we all know, education is is not going to be pretty this year and we want to give we children as much as we can 
and we've spent so many years working on this educating the whole child and worrying about social, emotional. 
I'm, the most emotional person shouldn't be talking about this, 
but. 
So a couple of things, our most vulnerable, social and emotional. 
As we see little children adapt much better. 
You see a two-year-old in target with a mask on it's, not a problem.
, my teenagers find the mask, uncomfortable and, and so hours. 
Six through 12, in my opinion, are our most mentally vulnerable 
and I just feel like, because things are so different. 
Are they going to be able to just go down to the guidance counselor just go down to you know, or things like that like, where they want to just go. 
Take five minutes with the guidance counselor or even the school psychologist. 
Is that still going to be fully in place opened to everyone? 
Is there also? 
I know that. 
I know that over the the distance learning period last year that our sagem north sel chairs they 
they did a tremendous job. 
Having a google meet also are are things for mental health in place 
and then my other question is what does recess look like in in covid land in elementary? 
I think, because I think I lightly brushed over that. 
So I'm glad that you asked me about that because you know so last year was the big thing that we were taking away: five minutes from lunch and recess 
and uh, there's always bigger fish to fry people. 
So, with that they're gonna be allowed to go outside 
they're gonna be allowed to run it all off. 
Are they allowed to play on the play gyms? 
Are they allowed to play ball with one another, or is it you're going to stay there and just run in place 
and you're going to stay there and run in place 
and? 
I mean, I think. 
Realistically they are children
, we're going to do we best to set up so that it's a safe environment, but there's not going to be boredoms out there if they are playing ball. 
I can't tell you that we will they're going to be, as I said earlier, rotating between the fields that we have the playground equipment that we have and then the basketball courts, so we would obviously have equipment outside for that. 
we do have sanitizing stations that we will be utilizing for the students but again. 
You know, as I said I think in the beginning. 
we do not want we students to come back feeling like we're in jail, and the first thing that we had on we slides was the social, emotional well-being of our students 
and I'm very proud of the program that we have built here, and we are just looking for unique ways whether it be virtual, more push in from we sel chairs. 
You know all project kindness, all of those things we'll still have all of those things this year. 
all of those things just may look a little bit different in terms of the mental health staff, ms graham and the office of student services. 
Now under the direction of mram better with ms graham, we will be deploying guidance counselor. 
All of those different all of those services are still in place, but we see we doing more proactive lessons as students come in and more push in into our classrooms, so that students feel comfortable. 
We know the issues that we're seeing out there again. 
Our sel chairs have sent out a survey to our students at the secondary level, and I agree with you at the elementary level we're going to be doing more proactive, resiliency skill type of activities with them. 
Our health teachers for the past year have been building a health workbook for the elementary schools that are rooted in all the resiliency skills that we have been studying using the university of pennsylvania. 
So we're really excited about what we can deploy for we students, and you know it goes back to
, we are so worried about curriculum and we are we are. 
we are going to work to ensure that all big ideas as much as we possibly can until this is all over is taught, but we first charge is just making sure that those kids feel happy and safe and healthy coming in and we staff as well. 
we staff has not only been teaching from home prior to the summer, but Our staff also had Our staff own issues that 
Our staff may have been you know undergoing. 
So that is our number one goal here. 
Thank you no problem, mr keith. 
Mr science.. 
One of the important questions that was asked this morning was about safety and about how kids are wearing kids masks on the bus they're getting off the bus 
and now they're walking into the building with 
they masks on maybe a hood on
, maybe a hat on and 
they're not going to be as easily identifiable as they have in the past. 
One of the suggestions was to wear lanyards with maybe id cards. 
I'm just wondering what else. 
If there's any other suggestions, if there's, how are we gonna, I mean? 
Obviously health and safety is number one concern that that is a that is a major concern of not being able to recognize kids and especially, ninth graders, who are now new to the building. 
So we don't know any of them to begin with, and and sixth graders are now going in there right. 
So there's going to be a lot of unfamiliar faces and even more unfamiliar with me.
, so not too unfamiliar only because we do have 
we transition meetings for all fifth graders going into the sixth grade and then all eighth graders going into the ninth grade, and we did those virtually over the past few months prior to the ending of school. 
So all teams at the high school level, in conjunction with their middle school and then middle school to elementary school. 
We met on every single student, not just some, but all so they were able to physically see a picture of the student talk about the student all of those things, so so We're hoping right that there are similar, some familiar faces coming in 
but, like We had talked about this morning, the use of the student badges. 
We have never truly enforced the way that we need to now, but We would have to ensure that the students are maintaining that and showing that because the students will be wearing masks as the students come in. 
However, We are also spacing things out, so the kids aren't coming into school in mass quantities, so should, in fact you know, prior to all the badges coming out. 
You need to slip down just so. 
We can kind of recognize you put back up and go back in. 
I think We would feel safe and comfortable in terms of that, but We'll be working with We staff working with security and seeing what other measures that we can, you know put into place. 
John. 
I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that. 
Just to pick it back up. 
If we're going to have the kids wear their id cards just a matter of how fast can we get the idea?? 
That's the 
that's the only thing, 
and that's why I say in the beginning. 
We may just have to do the old-fashioned, put it down for a second, so I can see, but you know 
We staff is pretty astute and granted the ninth graders. 
We may not recognize them all, but we all you know. 
We know our students here 
so, that's obviously 
another concern would be now 
We have them wearing them id cards and of course, we all know that 10 to 15 of the kids are either going to lose the kids or forget the kids. 
Do we have a mechanism to reprint them in the building daily so that everybody has one? 
Thank you,, so just for the community, we we are able to duplicate that., thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss any other questions we moved on. 
I just wanted to make sure that we at least took a poll of where we stand. 
As on remote learning, did we want to take a poll and leave a poll at one full year of a commitment? 
Did we want to talk about a half year? 
Did we want to talk about a quarter? 
I think it's important that we do it now, so that we don't wait until last. 
Second 
and we're changing[Music]. 
I understand what rob was saying before about this. 
I'm just curious why it wouldn't be sufficient if we just changed the language to where we could evaluate if it were possible and had people understand that it could potentially be that long, but we could, of course, if situations allow we can, we can, we can shorten it and truncate the time period. 
Can I just ask a question to mr block: 
I mean 
I just just because I can foresee 
I'm sorry jim just because I can foresee something are 
we are 
we even legally allowed to tell somebody they're not allowed to come back? 
That's 
you know, that's a 
that's an unanswered question. 
You know 
and it's unprecedented from a legal standpoint, and 
you know I understand fully the operational issues from a legal standpoint. 
You're going to want to see more flexibility, because the concern is that family will say that being denied. 
My right education, it responds back, is no you're being educated, being educated remotely, but that's not the same type of education as an in-person education. 
So from a legal standpoint, I would recommend that there be some flexibility built in. 
I was actually going to state that if you were going to do that, still keep the year, but have a reevaluation the ability to be able to re-evaluate, as ms heinz said, that that's going to occur on a student-by-student basis.
, if there's a concern from a parent, but parents are maybe being a little bit, not almost misled, but don't not aware of the fact that there may be a re-evaluation, but that's something you may want to clarify, and you could do it in an interval period. 
You could do it. 
You know after the first quarter,, that's as a re-evaluation, for example. 
I mean. 
One of my concerns would be is that they realize what remote learning entails and they're 
I. This is not what I signed up for we're not going live, we're not doing this or not right, and then we get an influx of kids and now class sizes grow and we don't have the space to have everybody in. 
So I just I want to make sure that we have that flexibility
, I'm sorry jim 
[Music]., my position is 
I like what bill just said. 
My position was to get the true figures. 
The way it went out was probably the right way to go, so people aren't saying.
, I can experiment for a while and we never really get a true picture, but at the same time I think if you put it if the language was softened up to say, the possibility of a full year is real. 
However, you know there's going to be, independent cases that have changed, etc, etc. 
So we all know that we all know that this could all change, but to get the true figure up front. 
I think they have to be aware that this could be a full year of remote learning.., that's just my opinion. 
and I apologize. 
I don't have the survey in front of me. 
I don't, 
I think I said could be, but I don't recall, but we could certainly again put that out once we see the numbers and 
if, in fact we feel like, maybe families felt a little bit, it was too strong and families're, not really quite sure we can. 
We could send a call out. 
We could send out an email as quick as you know now, if We wanted to the reason why I asked that question is: is that we based that plan on every single student returning?
, We did so the issue is not space. 
The issue is scheduling.
, that's correct right!
, so I view it as well and and because of the six feet right, you know obviously space because of that, but the six feet parameters is what allowed us to go to this plane to accommodate every kid. 
They should be right. 
So if we don't have all if, if not all kids return, then we will have more space, obviously and then can bring back more kids. 
So so the thing is like I said: the issue is not the space matter. 
You know the plan was devised based upon every single student returning and that's why I suggested you know, maybe doing the plan 
once you know one or four times a year. 
You know. 
For that reason, I understand that it could be a nightmare scheduling. 
if the restrictions aren't lifted, I guess we have 13 kids. 
In a seventh grade, honest math class and we're looking at a schedule, you're going to look at the section 
say all right put them in mrs smith's class or put them in correct.
, so you know the issue is that you have this. 
You have the space, it's just more of a scheduling thing, and I would imagine that if more and more kids come back from remote learning, we could reassign teachers to classrooms.
,, and- 
and that's the point so in a year where we're already saying the curriculum's interrupted the day has been corrupted. 
That's the only thing that we wanted to minimize in the beginning and get a true account, because you don't want to be moving teachers around and upheaving schedules, but we can of course always hand select 
and. 
You know put students in as outliers who really do need to come back, but we didn't want to forget. 
I don't know who said it before. 
we just didn't want people thinking, I'm going to try it out for a week 
and if I don't like it 
I'll, go because we're just. 
That would be really good. 
A quarter you know, and that will give us enough time to do the planning and do the scheduling if we have, if we had to. 
I just think that the one year signing something this is one year, scaring heck out of people based upon the phone calls that I received today. 
So I guess we'll have to then decide. 
Are we doing flexibility? 
The flexible option, obviously is the best for everybody, but do we want to say one year or do we want to say by quarter, 
and I guess we'll vote on that. 
So if you want to do a full year, write it with flexibility, you can vote on that full year. 
Flexibility,, so just put we'll put we hands up 
and I'll 
just we'll count them all full year with flexibility or flexibility with re-evaluating every quarter.
, so, but maybe we could put what would be the best way to well. 
I think that what I suggested would be if you want to stay with the full year, but that you re-evaluate on a quarterly basis, because I just caution us to if we all of a sudden say flexibility, then people, you know 
I 
just we have to have a true account. 
School starts in two and a half weeks, and I I don't mean to be crafts about that, but we we really do, 
and so I think, mr black, the way that you had said it. 
I think you know it's a year, but we would be reevaluating it throughout the year for everybody. 
I 
I 
I like what he said. 
Does that mean?? 
I don't think that you're going to make that full commitment. 
I don't think you can quite frankly. 
So I think that the concern was being raised was that parents, under the impression that you know no matter what I do 
it's a year now
, if I commit it's a full year, that's not going to be the case. 
We're going to look at it on a quarterly basis. 
Again, it's change. 
There could be 
a week wake up tomorrow with an executive order which states that parents, you know, can make the choice on daily basis. 
You know so you know, so I. 
I think that what it's going to be is that the district will look at it. 
We're going to look at We operational needs, We're going to look at the parental needs and make you know an informed decision, but that the benchmark be on a quarterly basis. 
Would it help if we provided some sample language 
and then you're able to let us know if that language looks appropriate, because we can send that out. 
You know as quick as. 
You know sunday evening or monday morning for folks perfect. 
Thank you any other questions. 
All right. 
We are back in the agenda letter f approval of minutes. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr mike caruso second and by meredith opie. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried number two. 
We are in the visitors section public comment that pertains to the agenda. 
I'm just going to need those cards or, if you're going to call those cards, is fine too 
I'm going to call up the names we do have several. 
I just wanted to make a reminder announcement that the visitor section, the public comment is in fact a public comment. 
It's not a question and answer type of period, so I know that some of the cards that we are getting do have questions on some of the cards that we are getting. 
I think possibly it's better. 
You know to if, if questions are asked, we can have them written down 
and we can take your email and we can have a response sent to you by email. 
If that's good or mr picarella, if you want, we can also include them in our forum on monday. 
That's fine right. 
I just think it would possibly be best to email or you know, speak with you separately regarding,. 
So the first gentleman, mr caputo, I'm sorry capuano, oh, my name is mike capuano. 
My daughter is brooke capuano. 
My daughter goes to sagem, you have an excellent school here 
and you have an excellent school because you have the best teachers in the country. 
I believe, when you take the teachers away, you have a bunch of buildings here:,, to think that you're going to lock a child in a room with a bunch of books 
and if you could fast forward 10 years that, like a doctor or a lawyer, is going to walk out of that room. 
It's just not going to happen.
, now the main reason that we're all here is the six foot: six foot: six foot: six foot- 
that's all we're here for why? 
Don't we tell everybody that that's a farce? 
If you build the partitions around the desk, the six foot is not necessary and I called osha 
and I called the governor's hotline.
, if you build the glass petition, the teachers are worried. 
Also. 
I understand that if you build a glass petition against the front, the teachers could walk in the back and the teachers would be behind the petition. 
711 protects their cashiers and they all come in when it's time for their shift and their're back there. 
Furthermore, the children could walk in behind the children petitions and take the children masks off. 
The teachers could be up there with the blackboards and take The teachers masks off and everything would be back to normal. 
This is all we're all here, because we're refusing to build the petitions. 
You could take that desk. 
There's schools that have taken that desk and they divide it like this boom and boom 
and there's four children on that desk 
and it's totally legal you can be. 
When you put a mask on then or any kind of petition, they said you could be nose to nose. 
I was just in a restaurant that was so packed the booth, the person right behind me I turned around. 
I was looking right in his face. 
I called the hotline from there because- and they said as long as there's a petition, there was a petition in between the booths and the petition was only this tall. 
I was looking in the guy's eyes and they said there's no regulations for the height of the petition.
, so all we need is the petition, and all this is gone.
, second of all, second solution: why don't you just have the people that want to come into school and the teachers that want to come into school come in and the ones that want to stay home and the children that want to stay home stay home instead of forcing the ones that are horrified to come in to come in and the ones that are desperate to come back in. 
My daughter wants My daughter teachers and My daughter wants My daughter school and My daughter wants My daughter friends.
, what? 
If all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in? 
Everybody who needed to came in to to help 
and they kept america going to mind odds that the schools are the only ones that let us down now, as this gentleman said these kids in five years, if we could fast forward to the ones that are starting now, they won't be able to read and write. 
I don't know how many people go to europe, but our kids already can't read and write. 
We are kids in college. 
That can't add this is the death knell of america. 
This is not some small thing here that you're deciding and there's no reason. 
These are guidelines. 
Schools all around you hop hog everything else open five days. 
This is your decision to do in the generation right here. 
Remember that this is the beginning of the end of america,,. 
We hope that they rescind this, but if they don't rescind this, this few years here will be known as the covid dummies. 
they won't make it into college. 
they won't do anything and there's no reason 
and. 
Lastly, I want to say, if you open the schools, why bother the first kid or the first teacher that gets covered you're going to close all of sagem? 
So this is all the foss all this money, the reopening programs and everything. 
It's all a big fuss,
, it's it because this is being treated like the bubonic plague. 
Mr capuano
, I'm sorry there's a three minute time limit.
, thank you. 
Studies all around the world have opened up. 
There's not one case. 
The ymca tracked their own tracing 40, 000. 
Kids, not one mr kevin. 
Thank you very much for coming. 
We appreciate it. 
Thank you so much for listening 
and I wanna say. 
Lastly, the governor said this is for us to talk not three minutes. 
I listened to this young lady for three hours. 
That was not the guidelines. 
You're worried about guidelines, guidelines, the governor said the people should be able to come in and talk not listen to. 
You guys tell me what to do with my child.. 
Thank you very much., miss muchitash. 
can I just start sure um, my name is lauren mukhitash 
I've been in station for 13 years 
now I have elementary age children, I'm going to jump the agenda. 
I'm sorry,, I'm going to jump the agenda a little bit and go to item 12. 
there's been a proposal to create a divor diversity task force in sacrum, central school district. 
I'm here to voice my support for the creation of that task. 
Force sachem student body is comprised of 25 percent racial minority students. 
Our e and l students represent a staggering 98 different languages spoken within this district of 13 000 students. 
Our students represent a multitude of cultures, religions and abilities representation matters. 
Our multifaceted student body deserves to see themselves reflected in themselves teachers and administrators in the books themselves have access to and read 
and then the curriculum they are taught. 
So I would just plead with the board. 
don't render this to a toothless subcommittee with no power. 
There are lots of things that I love about sagem, and I think that this is a step in the direction to improve upon what we already have a strong foundation for. 
Thank you. 
I'm sorry. 
Next is. 
Mr warren 
hi, my name is jason moore, I'm a parent in the community, sageman graduate. 
I would like to make a plea to the board: value and respect the school community by maintaining a high standard of transparency and communication at all times, but particularly in times of crisis. 
The communication from the central office and the board has been unacceptable. 
It is essential for every member of the school community students, teachers and families to be constantly updated at all times about every aspect of the reopening process. 
The meeting this meeting was not advertised to the school community at large. 
There were five parents outside barely and five parents left as soon as possible, communicate the following. 
communicate the following to community immediately. 
How will we ensure that our remote students are receiving an equitable education? 
I can't accept that they will receive a subpar education. 
You've put in your email that I received. 
While I was standing up front says it will not be the same. 
I need it to be equitable. 
I need my child to get an equitable education. 
They need to be live instruction and ongoing assessment. 
We need to figure it out. 
We need to put programmers in place. 
We need to figure it out. 
It has to be figured out. 
We cannot make an exception where part of our school community is receiving a subpar education. 
It's not acceptable, not acceptable to me should not be acceptable to you 
and it's not acceptable to your teaching staff. 
I know that for a fact. 
Secondly, a building space plan must be made available to the teacher to the parents of this community with individual room measurements and the capacity to maintain authentic social distancing at all times, and I need to know about the source of ventilation. 
I need to know what the school buildings look like. 
If you're telling me 17 kids in a classroom, I need to know that there's room for 42 square feet for every 17 one of those students I need. 
I need that in writing. 
Before I even think about sending my child back, I need clear opportunities for all parents to participate in this process. 
I shouldn't stumble upon this. 
I should be knowing about this weeks in advance. 
I need specific criteria for testing and tracing in all school buildings. 
I need a contingency plan for what happens when the rate of transmission rises above three percent. 
What do I do with my child? 
How do I make accommodations? 
I need to know these things before we put we kids on those buses. 
It's unacceptable that you're asking me to put a remote survey in place by friday, and your first parent meeting is on monday. 
That's unacceptable. 
The parents need to know. 
What's going on, the school community needs to know. 
What's going on, the teachers need to know, everybody needs to know it's unacceptable,. 
I need you to do a better job of communicating with the school community. 
Most important details need to be related to about our children's education in the future. 
address these issues immediately. 
The students, the teachers, the families in the school community deserve at least this much. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much. 
Miss favaro campbell
, I'm michelle for campbell. 
I wanted to just address the board about the diversity task force. 
As all of you know, I started that email and requested that that email be put on the agenda and that you all consider creating one. 
It's been 10 years that I, my daughter, started she's going to be a senior now so 10 years ago 
I actually started talking to a lot of district office, which is very changed now. 
Maybe mr scavo might have been on the board of ed back then I don't remember, but most of you are not we're not then. 
It's been 10 years, since my family started talking about the having more diversity and representation within sachem 
and I'm really excited to see it finally make an agenda. 
I want to also make it really clear that it's about race, religion and abilities. 
I want children in wheelchairs to see children in books in children classrooms. 
I want children with autism to know that they are just as represented as every other kid in every princess book in every superhero story, and I want to help show our curriculum expand to teach children that kids with down syndrome can be teachers, because there are stories of preschool teachers who have down syndrome and kids, who are deaf and blind can grow up to graduate harvard law, school and become disability advocates and travel the entire world, and I right now we just don't show that we don't have the staff. 
we don't have diversity in we staff. 
we don't have diversity even in the books that they see when they walk into a classroom. 
So I just wanted to thank you all for putting it on the agenda tonight and for entertaining the idea and to understand that it's actually bigger than one issue
, it's about every kid at sagem walking into their classroom, walking through hallways and right now, where I know reopening and dealing with covid, but this has been 10 years actually a little bit more in the making and sacrum is going to go on long before my daughter, who's going to be a senior and my son is going to be a freshman in high school they're going to be gone, and I don't want to leave that task force 
like I want this to be 10 years from now. 
Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program has a very different experience than what they had, and so that's really important to me that you all knew that. 
So. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss sanders,, everyone, oh, everyone, maria sanders,! 
I am a parent. 
I would like to just make a statement in respect to the reopening committee. 
I 
I was a member of the reopening committee 
and I just would like to express my disappointment in the fact that the reopening committee had no part in the actual planning or process of of the plan that was presented to the community. 
My understanding was that we would be part of that process, but instead we had two meetings where we were basically given the list of directives as administration and and the board of vet had planned. 
So basically, we got a sneak peek and the ability to ask a few questions, though I certainly respect the time and effort and energy that administrators put in, and I will not take anything away from that. 
You fail to utilize the very volunteers that you asked for because there was a tremendous amount of talent within that grouping 
and we certainly could have helped you in putting together this plan for myself having students in second in middle school and high school. 
I recognize that this plan is not going to be adequate for them and again, 
though, I understand right now, we we're hoping that the testing standards are loosened. 
The value of a full-time education will not be, and these children cannot get a full-time education when these children're in school. 
Fifty percent of the time they're only seeing a teacher, fifty percent of the time 
and they're they're sitting home in front of a computer for the other 50 that amounts to 10 days a month when normally they would be in school for five days a week. 
So I just asked that in the future, when you come to the community- 
and you ask us to step up and come in and help you really utilize us, because us voice really has not been heard. 
That's it! 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
miss williamson, nicole williamson,,, miss cologne, everyone, I'm josephine scalon. 
I have a soon to be second and third grader, and I just have a question because I'm still undecided about the virtual verse going to action school. 
If you go to school and you start in the school, do you have the option of then going virtual? 
Would that be an option? 
So I'm sorry 
go ahead. 
I'm sorry! 
So us're in this portion of the agenda. 
us're not allowed to do back and forth and answer questions. 
If you'd like us can have your question written down and leave your contact and us will answer any question that you have. 
I can promise thanks. 
Thank you very much. 
Is it allison? 
Is it on the court? 
Is her email on the card? 
There's a phone number on the card. 
Do you want to put an email perfect? 
Thank you so much, the next one was also several questions. 
Would you prefer to contact this person as well? 
I mean I mean this person's been waiting, so if this person wants to ask this person and then it's miss rep rapuno,, thank you,! 
That's all! 
For the first section we are on page two at the bottom number. 
Three business items consent agenda a through c, and I have a motion. 
motion by bill cogan second, by laura slattery. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried sorry bottom of page three personnel consent agenda. 
A through l. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
This is kate bleedin. 
So this is an unusual way to welcome many of our new staff, as we are having we first kind of live forum most of the time we have folks here to welcome them in person, and some of you are virtual. 
We would like to welcome all of We new staff that We vetted through really intense interview processes this summer with our administrative staffs in the building and staff members, faculty involved in the whole process and. 
That includes clerical custodial teachers, teachers, assistants and I think we have also gotten to the administrative section. 
Did I catch that correctly?
, so we're through the l- 
and I just want to welcome those folks that are in consent, agendas,. 
So far, thanks number five is support staff consent agenda a through j. 
Can I have a motion motion by meredith second, by jimmy and caruso. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried christie. 
Did you want me to stop again cause? 
I think you have michael there. 
joining us today is michael emanuel. 
michael is over here to my left, the far right, 
if you wanted to just stand and give yourself a wave, michael, is joining us today, as the network and systems administrator michael's been a integral part of our technology, staff who have been working with jack renda in it. 
We're really excited about all the great things that We're going to continue to get the growth for We technology as we push through and put our smart schools investment through and and enhance the use of our technology for our students and our staff. 
So welcome michael, we are on the top of page 12 number six personnel administrators consent agenda. 
A through g motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried, we'd like to take a moment to recognize two other folks in the audience today. 
joining us is dennis mcelherne. 
If you want to give a wave- not quite sorry, I'm trying to stay on top of it here. 
They're. 
This close, this close sorry guys a little more suspense 
we're going to be towards the top of page 14 letter h, probationary appointment of the administrative personnel. 
There you go andy. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins? 
Second by mr wadawa discussion, discussion. 
I will be voting on this in the next two personnel items.. 
My reasons are the same as they've been for the past several board meetings concerning central administrative positions. 
That is, I believe, the new superintendent should be part of the process in any administrative appointments.. 
What I must make perfectly clear is that these candidates, as well as those from the prior meetings, are qualified and capable of the positions to which they are being offered, and I would fully support them if the new superintendent was part of the process. 
So this is a process, negative vote and nothing to do with the personnel. 
the new superintendent is close. 
I mean we're almost there 
and we certainly have qualified staff who could perform these functions for a short time as interims, so that for that reason, and that reason alone, I'm voting on the next three administrative positions. 
I must stress it has nothing to do with the individuals. 
I fully support them and would support them in the future. 
Mr kieran, just because you asked for a discussion and for the public and anybody at home by losing our superintendent, our assistant superintendent and our special ed director
, our would have left three positions open where our would have needed interims and just for argument's sake, mr o'keefe. 
What is the going rate for an interim at that level per day? 
For which position are we speaking? 
Let's say it's: the superintendent rates vary, but a going rate for superintendent is probably 12 to 1300 a day, and then what about the assistant super? 
An assistant superintendent, depending upon which position it could be 800 to 1000 a day and an executive director of special ed would also probably be in a similar range, a minimum of 800 a day. 
So what and- 
and I don't necessarily disagree with your argument- 
but what what we did was we took a vote to have these positions filled. 
we had three people doing five people's jobs and it between losing that on a normal year is almost impossible, but losing it during covet is is impossible and we put things into motion to have these positions filled by qualified people to save that money, and this is money that I mean we we already just talked about taking custodians off- that we don't even know if buildings are going to get cleaned in time. 
Now we want to take more money out by filling these positions with indoors. 
I think that that's a slippery slope if we go down that path.
, I appreciate what you're saying my. 
My position is that a superintendent of schools,, is the single most important person in the district and totally accountable to us and the district for making decisions and to have a superintendent of schools, not part of the process. 
Even though a new superintendent come in and doesn't know, the personnel is certainly going to ask the qualified people who who the personnel are and do cement and be part of the interview process. 
I 
I think that's even more important than the saving of a few dollars here and there, but that's 
I mean I
, I see I'm alone in that position, but I stand by it. 
I 
I understand where you're coming from I just if I don't appoint somebody until september 1
, that's a long period of time at thirteen hundred dollars a day, eight hundred dollars a day, and while it seems like a few dollars here and there over a three month period that we haven't had people that it starts to add up, and when we need money down the line, I would be afraid that we put it on in a room 
is when we had qualified people who could take these positions immediately? 
I will remind you of your fiscal prudence soon, [Laughter] alex just because we're having a discussion, 
so mr 
kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight
, I I have personally known all of them. 
So it's without hesitation that I think that they are the best fit for sachem. 
I don't care who our superintendent is. 
I've trusted mr o'keefe, as our interim superintendent, to make the recommendations, and I 100 percent agree that any superintendent coming in will not find any better candidates than the ones we're putting forth tonight. 
Opposed motion is carried dennis, we're going to start with andrew larson, so andrew just want to welcome you to the high school north principalship
, andy has been a teacher in our schools. 
andy's been in personnel, 
andy's been in an elementary hiawatha principleship, 
a sagamore principalship, an ap and two of our high schools, and now andy's joining the ranks of the leader ship in north 
and we'd like to welcome you and wish you all the best we are on letter. 
I probationary appointment of the executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion. 
motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
[Applause] dennis mclehern. 
He's 
He's welcome back to sacham. 
He has been in our school district working as a school psychologist, an assistant to coordinator for special education. 
He left for a short stint to go over to north bab as a director over there 
and we're really lucky to have 
He back and part of we team as the executive assist executive director for special education. 
Welcome back [Applause] and letter 
j is an approval of an saa agreement for the executive executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion motion by ms slattery? 
Second, if I miss volpe, all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 14. contracts consent agenda. 
A through t. 
Can I have a motion ocean by mr coggins second by mrs wadwa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 20.. 
It's an action, itemist number, a mandated new york state board, training for matthew, bauman and robert scavo, all in favor, get kind of a motion motion by mrs volpe second by mr man. 
Caruso all in favor opposed motion is carried number b. 
It's an appointment of board committee members. 
Can I have a motion motion by miss lottery second by mr scavo. 
Any questions all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
Letter c. Is a board of education retreat? 
Can I have a motion motion by ms wado, a second by mr bauman, all in favor. 
Any questions sure I just want to make a quick comment:, especially since we're being fiscally prudent, a retreat is not like gurneys or something it's where we all sit in a room and talk. 
I just want to make sure that that's clear, because we are not going on vacation, though, because my first year I was prepared for gurney's 
and then we sat in the same set library. 
Thank you. 
we are on the top of page 22.. 
I'm sorry 
are we 
I apologize. 
Can I all in favor opposed motion is carried the top of page 22 donations consent agenda a through c. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggin second by miss ottawa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried number 10 at the bottom of page 22 committee on special education consent agenda, a through b motion by miss volpe. 
Second by mr mancaruso, all in favor opposed motion is carried number 11 monthly reports. 
So we there was a question from the community about when the committees would start meeting and how I think that, maybe, if people that were leading these committees, we want to maybe set some dates. 
we could do something virtually 
I'd like to see the budget committee start talking about if there was a possible mid-year cut and look into any and all options that there was. 
I don't know if there was anything else that you may want to look into, but that's just one that I thought of. 
I don't know about the budget committee. 
If mr kiernan has anything for the budget committee,, all right number, 12, we are back on public comment. 
This portion of the public comment will be on any and all items that anybody wants to speak at. 
That's not on the agenda, and everyone will have three minutes to discuss and, like we said before, this is not a q a and a back and forth, but we do want everyone to be able to be heard. 
That wants to be heard.
, the first one is miss young [Music]., I press this., thank you for waiting for so long. 
Thank you. 
You guys have been outside the season board of education, members and community. 
It's come to my attention that vp sarah waterworld wore a bill.
,, we're a blm t-shirt at a board of education meeting. 
This is unacceptable. 
I can respect a person's right to free speech and to have their opinion. 
However, blm is a political movement and it does not belong at our border bed meetings or in our schools and indoctrinations. 
The definition of a racist is paramount in the name of black lives matter. 
The name indicates that black lives matter over the other races. 
This is unacceptable and this racism does not belong, including the blm is putting itself over our law enforcement, which many of our community are employed and of all races this once again making blm a black organization. 
Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives have not registered as a charitable organization. 
We do not know whether the blm t-shirt, that was worn was for the black lives foundation or movement in either case. 
It has no right if any one of the board members wore my hat supporting trump, I'm sure the same thing would happen. 
The apology that was put on facebook was cynical and scolding. 
Call us as all races and insisting blm is not is not a political issue. 
Last I checked. 
Everyone in america had the same rights regardless of race, sex, color and sexual orientation. 
As specific cases of discrimination are happening in our community, then we must address those issues. 
What offended me is the use of rap music before sporting events, glorifying women's segregation, drug use and the cursing and the songs with the word and in it this is not acceptable. 
If we are going to talk about discrimination, it can it's got to be used both ways. 
So, let's start by banning that bml, not political, tell that to the murder black trump supporter bernal tramell. 
Furthermore, the disgusting political use of blm as an attack on our police and blue lives is not acceptable. 
Our community of all sects and races is made up of law enforcement. 
Blm is declaring war against all blue lives matter. 
Miss young there's a three-minute time limit. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much, miss, so conor. 
Thank you very much for waiting. 
I know that it's been a while 
okay.
, I am beyond angry at what is going on with our children.
, we are not doing the right thing by we children in any way, shape or form at this point in time whether we want to send our children to school or keep our children home. 
Neither of those options currently are acceptable. 
I sent everybody board members in email. 
I got one reply challenged every one of your board members to go and spend 10 minutes in one of the one of the classrooms. 
On the first floor in the second floor of one of the high schools did any of you do that? 
I didn't think so. 
Yet you all think it's fine, obviously that we have no ventilation in the classrooms for crying out loud. 
We have to have special ventilation in the malls and other businesses, but where We most vulnerable are we don't? 
None of you would work in these classrooms in the current conditions, none of you. 
So why would you think it's okay for our children to be in there even before this, but 
definitely now now the air in those classrooms just stands there, because there's no movement, there's,, nothing and covert will stand in the air until it falls down on somebody so you're putting our children in an environment that is guaranteeing that if somebody has gold, but it's going to get on all the rest of our children horrendous, it's despicable 
and now I'm hearing that remote learning is going to be a joke. 
That's not okay! 
Either!, I don't want my child in one of those rooms. 
I want my child safe, but my child is taking five ap classes next year, which means he needs a robust distance learning program. 
But my understanding is we're not doing that. 
Am I incorrect? 
No. 
So what we're doing to we children is despicable and you should all be ashamed of yourself just a second. 
Mr block, just a second, mr kyle 
I'll get your answer question right now. 
I had a conversation with him. 
You know, I know that you were asking the question about the being restricted in terms of the assembly, but 
it's pursuant to the governor's executive order, one of the number of executive orders 202.45, I looked. 
I believe I looked at that one, and that was talking about social media. 
This is okay, I'm just gonna back up just a little bit just so we can keep we space now. 
It talks about non-essential gatherings., and this is not essential. 
That's correct as long as while we're virtual, because you still have the option of being virtual, the board decided to assemble. 
so so you guys decided. 
This was not essential. 
So because you decided the governor, that's not that they don't decide.! 
So who decides well, there's based upon the governor's orders. 
the governor said that this is an honest. 
the governor said that we can conduct this meeting virtually or, you can but. 
So as long as you can conduct it, virtually meeting is considered to be non-essential because you have the ability to be able to connect the virtual reality.
, thanks thank you for that. 
It's, mr black, 
so 202.45 it was extended by 202.53 and it's in effect, until august 20th,, 
next fury good evening, I'm a proud sacrum educator and a parent of three daughters who attend sageman schools. 
I'm here tonight to voice my concerns regarding the secondary reentry plan. 
I have a daughter in eighth grade 
and I also have a senior. 
I have grave concerns regarding the lack of an equitable education for our secondary students. 
These children will suffer the ramifications of this decision in which These children will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
In some instances, this decision may change the course of their adult lives. 
I don't want that to happen to my children 
and I don't want it to happen to anyone else's. 
I implore you to reconsider the secondary reentry plan and attempt to find a way to make the secondary re-entry plan more equitable, so that our chm students can receive 100 of the curriculum that they are entitled to just like our elementary students. 
Thank you. 
That's all 23 board discussions. 
The first one we put on today was an adoption of the 20 2021 calendar. 
There was a talk of a change. 
Mr o'keefe. 
It's just you know something I want to bring to the board's attention because obviously administration has been meeting with district administrators as well as our teachers looking at the opening of school and just trying to be sure that we can be as prepared as possible for whatever that is. 
Other districts have taken a look at this and also chosen that option each year a district is allowed up to four superintendents conference days. 
Our current calendar has three. 
The first two are in september the september second, and third days are superintendents conference days and the third one would be. 
On election day november. 
Third, we've been discussing the possibility of having the board consider the ninth, which is wednesday
, I'm sorry, eighth, which would be the the first day of school for students to be a third superintendent's conference day in september. 
That would give staff teachers administrators everything all the time that staff teachers need to be sure if there are those last minute, tweaks changes to classroom setups changes to schedules assignments. 
Whatever the case is, you know, I had a lengthy conversation with mr barbara last night. 
You know his guidance. 
Counselors are ready to dive in to do whatever work needs to be done to make our secondary experience as good as possible, but we need the data first. 
So once we have that data we can dive in on this, we don't have much time and time is not on we side. 
So for your consideration, we'd like to talk about adding the eighth as a superintendent's conference day. 
Would we have to remove another day off the calendar for that we would just convert that date to a super. 
I wouldn't alter the calendar right now other than that. 
Obviously, since the year hasn't even begun, it still keeps us within legal limits. 
it still leaves us the flexibility if we were to have a severe winter. 
You know, maybe with the new reality of our ability to switch between distance learning. 
Maybe that can even help us. 
You know in bad storms and things like that, where us might be able to turn something like that on and not lose instructional time, but I think giving the staff that extra time, especially since we're down to the wire you know, could be helpful now on the counter side. 
Obviously, families are already starting to make plans families're ready to send kids back on the 8th families've already made decisions families've arranged child care. 
Whatever the case is so it isn't just as simple as you deciding let's re-adopt a calendar, and maybe it's not even something you do tonight. 
Maybe it's something you consider you think about, and maybe it's on the next agenda for the 26th, but I wanted to bring it to your attention to give you some time to think about it and talk about it. 
you know. 
Is it a possibility where we could consider that day, for additional staff planning? 
Does anybody have a question about the calendar? 
I'm just thinking we're gonna make this decision. 
we have to make it tonight, so parents do have enough time to make arrangements. 
Mr bauman, can you what kind of professional development day would it look like? 
What would it look like?
, it would be a useful day for the teachers too. 
It's not a none. 
I mean miss heinz, can speak better to the professional development days. 
None of them are going to be like the normal professional development days. 
I'm sorry
, I didn't mean professional development superintendent's day. 
Would it be a day that the teachers would be able to kind of get the teachers stuff together?
, we so I mean, as we've been saying, our teachers have been working hard all summer ongoing professional development. 
This is really more honored space for our teachers, so our teachers can continue to clean up. 
Get things ready, make sure the google classrooms all their lessons, are in place. 
So not our traditional. 
You know ad camp style superintendents conference days, but we recognize that it's a tremendous amount of work to get started. 
Does anybody have any other questions? 
Does anybody want to vote on it tonight or did you was the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready? 
It came through a conversation. 
You know, administration and staff have asked for it. 
So I agree with sarah the earlier the better I would agree as well. 
We can vote on it right now. 
All right motion to change the calendar to the eighth being a staff development day. 
Second, by miss volpe, all in favor opposed the calendar is done, get that information out to families as quickly as possible. 
The next item up for discussion is future board letter writing. 
This is something that I personally put on. 
I 
I don't think that we should be putting letters out to the community if, with all of we names on it, if we don't agree with what it says, and I could be in the minority on that- 
but I'm I would be fine with writing a letter, putting spaces underneath and letting those who agree. 
Do it now 
most times it's a nine, nothing 
and there's no issues 
but. 
You know I personally didn't agree with the letter that got put out and if my name is going to be on it especially admonishing another board member. 
I have to agree with it 
and that's just the way I personally feel about it. 
I understand that we're a body 
and I get that, 
but at the end of the day, it's our name 
and we have to put we head on 
we pillows and 
if we don't agree with something I want everyone to have the freedom to not only say that but be able to just to live with the decisions that are made and to be able to stand up to the community and say here. 
I did this or I did not do this and have a straight face when you say it, 
I 
I just 
I didn't agree and 
it's my fault for you know ever putting my name on that piece of paper. 
So I just I want to put it from here on out. 
If anyone has an issue, feel free, but if, whatever letter it is, we write the letter, our names are on the bottom and we can sign the letter if we agree with the letter. 
If we don't, we take the space away and then you don't have to sign the space. 
If you don't want to, but at least you can, you can make your own decision and you don't have to feel like you're beholden, 
because maybe it's only five people who agree with it and five out of the nine agree and now, all of a sudden, it's a board decision and your name goes on it, no matter what jim so
, how do you determine whose name is going on suppose four people want the letter out is: is that sufficient to send the letter with four names? 
That's! 
That's why it's up for discussion, so I did it. 
So it's got to be a majority. 
Take to even have the letter go out, so five members have to support the letter and then, let's suppose it's a 5-4, the letter does go out board of education and the five members who agree with the letter sign the letter. 
That's 
I'm going to see that if anybody had an issue with that, I I just wanted to address it tonight so that we haven't had a chance to get all together in a room. 
So so let me express you on the opposite end of the spectrum. 
If four people want to put a letter out and it's a four or five board, the four people be able to put a letter out, because the way that, when you sign up for the board of education, you sign up as a group, and you vote as a group- 
and, listen, there are things that happened in the past. 
Why? 
I was on the no side of a vote where I got dragged to the mud, but I signed up for that. 
You know, so my my impression is that five is a majority and and it's what moves resolutions and it's what moves you know. 
You know different different incent, you know initiatives and so on and so forth. 
So so I think the easy way to do that is that when you're getting attacked by a community member, because of what the letter says, your response is look the board. 
The board majority voted on it. 
I don't necessarily agree with it. 
You know, if you have concerns, contact the rest of the board. 
You know 
and that's how we leave it. 
Just just my just my personal opinion this I happen to disagree 
only because when we pass, let's just say the new principle for sage of north in the in the minutes, it will reflect that jim voted.
, it's not going to vote that., we voted, but if you go look in the in the back to it, jim can say I 
I 
I said and 
jim could say anybody to the community and here's why I voted and jim could put jim head on jim polo and jim's fine like it will not reflect that. 
I said and, and just, I think it's wrong- that you get dragged through the mud on stuff that you voted for, and you can't even back it up, because there is no record of you ever saying.
, unless you look through certain things on votes, but if it's a letter, there's no record of anybody saying, but if the letter's coming from the board of education is it coming from the board of education? 
Is it coming from five board members? 
I mean I, so I guess my point is: I don't think we should be writing any letter. 
That's admonishing another member 
I mean most most letters are in agreement to the state saying we need we funding to the state saying we don't agree with certain things that they're doing, but we should certainly not be or so and maybe, mr black, you can answer this. 
When we get elected to the board of education, my voice means nothing more than anybody sitting out there. 
My voice only means one as part of us nine. 
We 
I have no 
I can't decide anything. 
I have no more decision making than my neighbor next door. 
My my only input or influence comes as as a board of nine, so the letters that we had done previously, like supporting we seniors graduating in person or the denouncement of betty devos as the education or denouncing racism that was issued as a board, not as me as an individual. 
So I think legally, mr black, if you could just give us some guidance here that, when the board of education of sagem school district issues a letter, I think it has to come from the board. 
If laura slattery, who who lives in wisconsin, wants to send a letter to governor cuomo, then I signed my name: laura slattery, not laura slattery, ch, board of education, trustee and- 
and that's 
I feel that me on this board, I'm not a republican democrat independent anything. 
I am representing a community of 55 000 registered voters, my personal opinions or anything I feel 
personally does not matter when I'm sitting here with the nine nine of us. 
My only thing that I can do as a board trustee is in as a majority of this board. 
Unless, legally you see something, that's how I feel I was elected by the voters. 
I was elected by my sachim community. 
I 
I feel like I have to represent my sagem community as one of nine, not as laura slattery individual and, of course I don't think, that's being suggested, but we're a governing body and every governing body around the country operates that way. 
You operate as a body, you're elected to be part of this body. 
You make decisions as a as a body. 
There may be differences of opinion, that's part of our democracy. 
That's what makes the country great you'll, be able to express those opinions. 
At the end of the day, you have to make a collective decision, and then you have to abide by the decision that that body makes one possible solution. 
Is that? 
If you are going to issue a letter and there's concerns that dissenting members vote is not going to be known like it is? 
When we take a public vote, you can take a public vote to send the letter, and then you can adopt a letter as a majority vote. 
Those who dissent are on as a matter of record Those who dissent're on Those who dissent're on record, if that's the case, so so you're saying that no one member is allowed to remove their name from a letter. 
I would say that that's not typical practice that you would see, but is it legal for a member to remove a name?, if the, when your letter is going out, I don't think it typically sets forth all the names. 
I don't know. 
I don't really like to say it. 
Has it printed all your names on the left side, it says, there's a list of all the names and on the bottom
, it's the president's name. 
So, on the left side of the letter it has all of our names listed. 
But that's your that's! 
Your letterhead lists all your names. 
It doesn't indicate whether or not you voted for that letter to go out or not. 
It's you're represented on Your letterhead. 
It's an official board of education stationery! 
That's why your name is on there. 
It's not signaling that you voted for that or not, but the recognition is, though, that when you do take a vote or when the board puts out material that that's so 
so that's a fine
, that's a compromised decision. 
I think that any and all letters should be discussed in public and voted in our public. 
That is a concern that you have that's one way of addressing it. 
I I was just going. 
I was just going to say that that sounds like an excellent idea and that really just goes back to 
you said about my vote. 
You know is on record and your eight votes are on record for these fine individuals here. 
So that would be the same thing. 
We discuss a letter. 
You know we take a vote on it.
, if it's a majority vote, a letter will go, but the dissenters are also in the minutes. 
I like it 
and I'm 100 in agreement with that. 
This way, it's a public discussion. 
Anybody can look back, but then we still are issuing a letter based on a majority of the board, but as long as there's a record of who votes and who votes?
, I'm correct. 
I am 100 fine with that. 
Just one statement and me and laura have gone round and round about this before, but I want to. 
I want to make this point. 
Look we're all elected members to this board as any elected official is. 
If I want to write a letter- 
and I want to sign my letter bill, cogan board trustee sachem, I'm 100 within my rights- to do that. 
It's a matter of opinion as to whether or not I should do that 
if I want to get together with four other board members and each one of us want to sign it as board trustees. 
Once again, us are within us rights to do that. 
All right. 
It may be perceived as a bad idea by this board, but there's nothing illegal about it.
, inside it's not a vote. 
I don't think we're going to take here. 
I just I just wanted to make sure that we discussed it and there was at least a public so that all future letter writing is done in public and just also just to add to it. 
It's been customary that at the bottom of the letter, the signature block states, the president's name on behalf of just signed the letter sincerely the sachin board of education and not place the president's name on the bottom of the letter.
,, the last item up for discussion is the diversity task force. 
So, as you guys know, I gave you guys all an outline about what just got a little bit closer.
, I gave you all the an outline, probably in the end of july, and I don't know if you all got a chance to look it over. 
I shared it with this board again the other day. 
Sarah. 
So I would just like to make a motion to put it on to vote tonight on establishing this task force. 
I mean my my only issue is, and I don't have a problem with this diversity task force, but the way community committees are usually done is that we could vote to establish one give direction to administration to come back as to what the charge is going to be talk about the charge and then approve it. 
I 
I 
I would say that that's that's, probably the route we should go and in the years that have been on this board
, we establish construction capital projects, committees and you know some are established for one specific job 
and then they 
they they disappear, and that was for one of the. 
You know construction projects that we did after that 
we didn't do any for a while. 
So we didn't need that organization, but I would say that we we either vote on it tonight.
, we want to pursue something like this. 
we understand what the end game is, what we're trying to achieve 
and then normally what happened is administration would put together a packet of a pamphlet, that's made available to the community. 
They could download it in a pdf format. 
People would sign up for it submit in the same way People would for a budget advisory committee. 
You know or so 
or you know any other thing, so I would just say that we we follow that format. 
You know and- 
and you know, we're not adopting exactly what the world 
but we're establishing a diversity, task force and and charging administration to come back to us with what the charge is going to be. 
I would have no problem with that. 
Any questions everyone all in favor of 
I'm sorry, yep. 
I read the whole thing like lots of times. 
I think it's great, you know we need it here in saturn, all in favor, all right any opposed. 
Mr picariello, this still one visitor that we had called wasn't here at the time. 
miss williamson. 
Thank you, miss williamson, I'm sorry! 
I know that it's late, I apologize. 
I was doing yard work 
and I was listening. 
Thank you and I had to come 
so I apologize. 
This is my first time doing anything like this, so I really don't have anything written out or able to look up anything outside. 
So I'll tell you about myself. 
I have four children, three at hiawatha, two of them with severe nut allergies and one of them with viral induced asthma. 
I didn't, I don't really know.
, let me just go with this. 
My kids are fine, My kids will be homeschooled and My kids will be homeschooled.. 
What about all the other children that aren't as lucky as My kids? 
How come? 
Nobody is talking about them? 
How come what nobody's talking about the children getting hit at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't eating at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't learning or being sexually abused at home? 
Nobody cares about those kids. 
I hear a lot of things, how we're emptying the rooms and there's going to be nothing in there? 
No one's allowed to touch each other, no one's allowed near each other. 
we're not 
we're teaching we kids to be scared. 
I was scared for a long time. 
I've been hurt. 
I've been scared of allergies and a nut killing. 
My child fear cannot run us. 
We need to stand up for who We are and what We believe in 
and I believe all our children deserve a fair chance at life 
and We are not giving it to them. 
I think I think that's it. 
Thank you very much. 
I know that you waited a while. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Letter c is board of ed discussion. 
Future agenda items future discussion. 
Items excuse me: does anyone have anything future to talk about covered three tonight? 
We, the next meeting. 
I don't know if that's the right date. 
That's today.
, the 26th is august. 
26Th
, we're hoping to still be here at 7, 30 p.m. 
Can I have a motion to move into executive session 
now we need a reason. 
Mr block, we're discussing we're discussing property,, property. 
I'm sorry! 
I just lost me. 
First real estate transaction, real estate transaction. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins say goodbye, mr bauman. 
All in favor meeting is good. 
Thank you very much. 
Everyone good night be careful. 
Going home,.
thank you very much
 
 
 
 is
 
 
[Music]
 
 read the congratulations
 
 
 
 
so
 
 
 
 
 
 visitors
 
 
everyone rise for the pledge
 
 and then remain standing for a moment of
 
 silence
 
 with liberty and justice for all
 
 
thank you
 
 
[Music]
 
 
good evening everyone as you can see 
the
 
 board of education
 
 is attempting to return to some form of
 
 public meeting which is also compliant
 
 within the limits set forth
 
 by the governor's executive orders and
 
 the guidelines of the cdc
 
 and department of health we must limit
 
 
the number of people permitted
 
 to be physically present as a part of
 
 our compliance with those obligations
 
 perhaps the most important item for our
 
 meeting tonight is a public discussion
 
 about the reopening plan for september
 
 as it pertains to the plan we hope to
 
 have answers to most of your questions
 
 as part of the presentation but may also
 
 need time for the administration
 
 to research an issue on occasion you can
 
 
always email the superintendent with the
 
 question as well
 
 
i am also aware 
that some attendees may
 
 wish to speak about matters related
 
 to conversations that occurred on social
 
 media and the role of the board of
 
 education in that regard
 
 if you wish to speak be sure to
 
 fill out a card
 
 and give it to the district clerk there
 
 
will be two opportunities for public
 
 to speak at this meeting 
the first is
 
 limited to comments relating to agenda
 
 items 
only
 
 we will then move through the agenda
 
 after we complete the agenda items 
a
 
 second opportunity for public comment
 
 about non-agenda items will be provided
 
 
i ask that all present be
 
 reminded to be respectful of one another
 
 the administration and the board also
 
 
the opportunity for public comment is
 
 just that public comment
 
 
the board of education will not engage
 
 in debate or back and forth
 
 with the public during the period of
 
 public comment in an
 
 attempt to provide all who wish to speak
 
 an opportunity to do so
 
 our policy limits comments to three
 
 minutes there may be people who wish to
 
 
speak
 
 who have been left outside due to 
space
 
 limitations
 
 ask security station at the doors
 
 for a card and they will bring it in to
 
 the clerk
 
 again while we respect the community and
 
 we always want to provide people with
 
 
the opportunity to be heard
 
 if things devolve into personal insult
 
 or invective as the president
 
 
i will entertain a motion to adjourn the
 
 meeting 
i thank you all in advance
 
 for your cooperation
 
 to start tonight's meeting mrs heinz and
 
 mr o'keefe are going to make a
 
 presentation
 
 about our reentry plan sure miss florio
 
 
could you
 
 fire up the cameras for us
 
 
all right just give us a moment while we
 
 wait for that 
and while we're doing that
 
 
i'd also like to apologize
 
 to those from watching from home because
 
 unfortunately obviously from that
 
 distance
 
 you're not really going to be able to
 
 see our screen 
so
 
 
for that we're very sorry 
you know
 
 
unfortunately the limitations
 
 of how many people are in the room you
 
 know 
have we been able to move it to an
 
 auditorium we certainly would have done
 
 that
 
 
but we're limited to a total of 50
 
 people
 
 or 50 of a room's capacity whichever
 
 number is lower
 
 
so unfortunately we're at that 50
 
 capacity in this room this evening
 
 
this document we're going to show
 
 tonight again is another evolving
 
 document
 
 
back on the 31st we placed the
 
 district's plan on the website as
 
 required by state law
 
 that plan had to talk about three
 
 different models for return
 
 which it did since the plan was posted
 
 on the website
 
 
you may have seen additional commentary
 
 from our governor where he has since
 
 changed some of the parameters such as
 
 offering additional
 
 opportunities for choice for family 
 
 and or for staff
 
 
so we need to take those things into
 
 consideration so again
 
 this document and the presentation
 
 
you're going to see this evening
 
 is the most accurate as of now 
but it by
 
 far is not completed
 
 at the conclusion of tonight's
 
 meeting in this presentation
 
 
you're going to get a copy of this
 
 presentation emailed to you
 
 through the school messenger system
 
 
it'll also be up on social media
 
 and it'll be up on our website 
you're
 
 
also going to receive
 
 an invitation to participate in a survey
 
 regarding choice 
it's a follow-up to the
 
 survey
 
 that we sent out last week where we
 
 asked potential preferences
 
 
this one's going to need to be more
 
 definitive where we actually need to
 
 know which families
 
 are looking to have their children
 
 receive instruction at home
 
 versus those that are willing to send
 
 children to school
 
 
so without further ado 
i'm going to
 
 
ask miss heinz to start us off
 
 
thank you mr o'keefe so this morning
 
 we actually concluded and had our last
 
 committee meeting which culminated in
 
 the plan that we're going to be sharing
 
 with you tonight
 
 
and as mr o'keefe said all of the
 
 community members will be receiving at
 
 eight o'clock
 
 a phone call to this manner and also
 
 the plan
 
 and the survey for remote learning 
i
 
 just want to thank
 
 all of the folks that were on that
 
 committee with us we are made up of
 
 
several community members unit leaders
 
 staff of all sorts and 
it really has
 
 been a pleasure to work with everybody
 
 
excuse me one second while i got this on
 
 so after a tremendous amount of
 
 feedback that we received from our
 
 survey from our community
 
 and given the lengthy documents that we
 
 have given out and the models over the
 
 past few months
 
 
i can happily say that we are able to
 
 offer a full return for our elementary
 
 students k-5
 
 as well as a full return for our
 
 students with disabilities our special
 
 class
 
 which would be our 15-1 classes our 12-1
 
 classes and our 8-1
 
 students and at the secondary level
 
 due to size and the fact that because we
 
 will need to reappropriate space at both
 
 levels elementary and secondary
 
 we will have to move forward with a
 
 hybrid model for grades six to twelve
 
 and that will be an a b schedule based
 
 on alpha and household
 
 
the reason why we were able to offer
 
 a full return
 
 for our elementary school is because mr
 
 o'keefe and myself
 
 and our instructional directors and our
 
 director for facilities and the building
 
 principal
 
 began walk-throughs 
last week we walked
 
 through each and every room in our
 
 buildings to space and measure at six
 
 feet
 
 on the average we are able to fit about
 
 17 students in a class
 
 now again know that we have
 
 scheduled a full return
 
 with our total population so with any
 
 remote instruction that would diminish
 
 the amount of students coming into our
 
 schools so we would actually
 
 have even more room because of the re
 
 appropriation of space we needed about
 
 one extra section or one extra grade
 
 level
 
 k5 at each building generally so we are
 
 going to be utilizing space in our
 
 libraries in our arts and our music
 
 rooms
 
 and other common areas 
which we'll talk
 
 about a little bit later on
 
 remote learning is something that as you
 
 know last week it was confirmed that
 
 we will as districts need to be offering
 
 this to our students as well
 
 this will be a parent choice and a
 
 consent tonight at eight o'clock
 
 again when you receive that plan
 
 there will be a survey in there 
and we
 
 ask that only parents
 
 who are looking to remotely instruct
 
 their child fill out the survey
 
 and it is due it is a fast turnaround by
 
 
friday
 
 
we need to be able to staff and schedule
 
 the remaining students that we have
 
 coming into our schools
 
 
remote learning again 
that is by a
 
 parent's choice
 
 with consent and 
at this time
 
 it is a decision for the entirety of the
 
 2021 school year
 
 
i say this now because based on the
 
 number of possible staff who may also
 
 look for accommodations that might mean
 
 staff members staying home in
 
 conjunction with our students we need to
 
 match up to see if we have enough staff
 
 members who are going to be able to
 
 offer remote instruction
 
 
or should we have to look towards live
 
 streaming if we do not have enough
 
 certificated staff that matches up with
 
 the number of students
 
 and so therefore we would not have
 
 possibly a physical space for students
 
 to come back to if that were the case
 
 
should of course all restrictions be
 
 lifted through the governor's office
 
 then we would have to and hopefully
 
 would have a little bit of time in
 
 between 
we would just have to
 
 restructure and reschedule to ensure
 
 that all students are able to return
 
 
remote instruction will entail it is not
 
 like being in person school 
and it is
 
 not distance learning distance learning
 
 
is
 
 
only going to be offered if again we are
 
 ordered by
 
 the governor's office to remain at home
 
 
all students and all staff remain at
 
 home
 
 and that would be live instruction for
 
 two and a half hours on google me
 
 that would be k12 remote learning is
 
 different
 
 
this is more asynchronous
 
 learning with possible live or streaming
 
 teaching
 
 happening throughout the day 
this would
 
 also be a schedule that would look a tad
 
 different
 
 based again on the number of students
 
 and how we would need to support
 
 everybody
 
 
but we just did want to be you know
 
 fully upfront and present about that
 
 
we also know that devices for us 
we are
 
 not a one-to-one school district we have
 
 definitely made some strides 
and we are
 
 in the middle of major infrastructure
 
 work that is going on 
we just did order
 
 
about a thousand new chromebooks
 
 
in order to be able to disperse for
 
 families that do not have any technology
 
 in their home at all
 
 
but it would be difficult for us to
 
 provide a device for every student in
 
 their home
 
 
should they be on remote learning 
so
 
 that would be something that the family
 
 would also have to consider
 
 students will be expected to complete
 
 all assignments daily
 
 and any students obviously with
 
 disabilities on remote learning 
would be
 
 
provided all of their accommodations as
 
 per iep
 
 as for their iep
 
 
it's important 
i'm sorry 
it's
 
 important to just also talk about the
 
 secondary hybrid model for six to twelve
 
 on your a day 
let's just say you know
 
 for the sake of just explaining it to
 
 
everybody
 
 
it would be a combination on on a day
 
 
you would be in your child would run
 
 their traditional regular schedule
 
 
they would leave with homework and any
 
 work that would be on their google
 
 classroom for the next day that they are
 
 home
 
 while the teacher is then teaching the
 
 other second half of the class on b
 
 
obviously our teachers are committed
 
 folks and they would be checking in
 
 answering any questions
 
 within that 24-hour period 
but we
 
 would expect that at the secondary level
 
 again
 
 kids will be making sure that all of
 
 their assignments are completed and they
 
 are
 
 and they are present attendance is
 
 important as we move forward in this
 
 school year
 
 now that we shared with you a model
 
 of how we're looking to return our
 
 students 
i think it's very important
 
 that all families and community members
 
 now our staff knows
 
 about the health and safety measures
 
 that we are putting in place 
and we
 
 continue to
 
 
look to put more in place as as time
 
 goes on
 
 masks will be required for all staff and
 
 students both in school and on the bus
 
 remember that the bus is an extension of
 
 school any students are
 
 having any difficulty wearing a mask for
 
 medical reasons
 
 or because of a disability will need to
 
 submit documentation as always
 
 they would affirm this with their
 
 building principle or through the office
 
 of student services
 
 mass breaks will be provided because
 
 remember in our classrooms our desks are
 
 six feet apart
 
 and in the regulations children do not
 
 have to wear a mask during instruction
 
 we would encourage of course that masks
 
 be worn at all times but that does give
 
 us the opportunity to give
 
 multiple mass breaks whenever a child
 
 does need it while they're being
 
 instructed
 
 masks are to be worn though however in
 
 the hallways cafeterias if they're not
 
 eating
 
 recess any other common area that we
 
 would just want to be
 
 safe we also every day
 
 
i'm sorry 
excuse me bus travel
 
 will also include as i said before
 
 social distancing practices
 
 optimally we will be looking for six
 
 feet spacing and encouraging family
 
 members to sit together
 
 every day 
parents and staff will be
 
 expected to fill out an online health
 
 screening survey
 
 and in this presentation 
when you do
 
 receive it
 
 you will see a hyperlink in there that
 
 you can see a sample of what it looks
 
 like
 
 ahead of time we are also
 
 
we also took time to ensure that at
 
 arrival and dismissal
 
 varied entrances in all of our buildings
 
 will be sanctioned off to separate grade
 
 levels if they come off of the bus
 
 
we are also looking to take off the
 
 grade levels
 
 at increments of time off the bus 
so
 
 
everybody is not coming out at the same
 
 time
 
 so again just looking to work ways to
 
 have plenty of flow
 
 while classmans may not look typical
 
 especially at the younger levels you may
 
 
not see
 
 some of the rugs and some of the the
 
 other items the kitchen items things
 
 like that that you would normally see
 
 know that our classrooms will be
 
 warm and inviting 
like they always are
 
 because their teachers will be there
 
 
their principals will be there and we
 
 will still be able to decorate it
 
 
we will just not be able to decorate it
 
 with things that kids will be touching
 
 because it would need to be sanitized
 
 every day all classrooms will be devoid
 
 as i said before
 
 of any of those items that may collect
 
 germs we are in the process right now of
 
 setting up
 
 opportunities for our teachers to
 
 continue to clean out their their own
 
 personal items
 
 and we are also moving out any unwanted
 
 furniture that we don't need in the room
 
 so that we can maximize 
the space
 
 hallways and other common spaces are
 
 being marked appropriately
 
 to ensure social distancing so markings
 
 on the floor
 
 items around on the walls and that's
 
 also shared later on
 
 in our presentation so you will be able
 
 to see it at home as well when you open
 
 up 
the link
 
 hand sanitizer stations are located
 
 throughout each building
 
 all along the hallways 
we will also be
 
 
having them at the elementary level or
 
 any other area for gym
 
 cafeteria time when at the secondary
 
 level they're able to go out
 
 so as children go in and out they can
 
 use a hand sanitizer
 
 as they come into school 
all of those 
 
 you know welcoming areas would have a
 
 hand
 
 sanitizer station as well and at the
 
 elementary level
 
 we would expect that the students
 
 because we do have sinks in every room
 
 
they would be washing their hands before
 
 and after snack and before and after
 
 lunch
 
 so continued on as i said earlier
 
 we have reappropriated spaces at the
 
 elementary level
 
 
and we are in the process of doing the
 
 same walkthroughs now in the secondary
 
 buildings
 
 
we know it's going to be very difficult
 
 especially for the cafeterias to be
 
 
utilized the way that they typically are
 
 because children cannot sit in those
 
 tables together 
so
 
 moving in some desks looking at
 
 classroom use all of those different
 
 types of things
 
 but really at the elementary level we
 
 will be using again
 
 if we're going on full return for all
 
 students right now in elementary school
 
 
we would be looking to utilize our music
 
 space our art space 
and so therefore
 
 those special areas become pushing for
 
 our students
 
 
we have worked with those departments
 
 and we'll continue to work to make sure
 
 that they
 
 have everything that they need for 
their
 
 lessons and equipment
 
 cleaning of all buildings will occur
 
 daily in the evenings
 
 in each classroom we will also provide
 
 hand sanitizer wipes gloves
 
 and any sort of spray bottles and wipe
 
 offs
 
 for for our staff and or 
students who
 
 feel encouraged to clean in between
 
 applicable filters have also been
 
 changed in our classroom events
 
 
we will also look to open up our
 
 windows and our doors where we can
 
 obviously you know the reverse was
 
 safety making sure that your doors were
 
 
always locked your windows were always
 
 
closed
 
 
now we're being encouraged by the
 
 department of health to please use fresh
 
 air when possible so we will look to do
 
 that prior to
 
 it becoming too chilly up isolation
 
 areas have been identified in our
 
 buildings
 
 and so if a child 
 
 is it has any sort of of symptoms or
 
 
they come to school 
and they have not
 
 filled out the health screening
 
 
those students would be placed there so
 
 that we can offer a temperature check
 
 and make sure that everything looks 
okay
 
 
before we send them down to their
 
 classroom
 
 hygiene protocol visuals will exist in
 
 all buildings if they're not there
 
 already and again i share those with you
 
 at the end
 
 of our presentation so that you can see
 
 them we will also be having routine
 
 hygiene drills much in the same of how
 
 we have regular school building drills
 
 at this time unfortunately no visitors
 
 will be permitted in our schools
 
 
we just cannot provide enough
 
 secure measures for our staff and our
 
 students and so
 
 again we will be limiting all visitors
 
 both traditional fire and hygiene drills
 
 
will be conducted
 
 elementary snack and lunch will be in
 
 the classroom to minimize flow
 
 and secondary lunch it may be in the
 
 cafeteria and alternately in the
 
 classrooms
 
 
we will also rotate any outdoor areas 
so
 
 for recess any of those other matters
 
 classes will be rotated on the game
 
 field 
the basketball court let's say for
 
 example
 
 and in our playgrounds students are
 
 encouraged to bring their own water
 
 bottles
 
 
we do have bottle filling stations in
 
 all of our buildings
 
 our water fountains unfortunately will
 
 have to be closed at this time
 
 so just some additional elementary
 
 return details that we wanted to share
 
 with you
 
 
you know it's always tough to start with
 
 health and safety 
because again we don't
 
 want it to sound like our students are
 
 returning to jail 
but we do want to make
 
 sure
 
 that our students and our staff feel
 
 safe for the return
 
 but know that on top of
 
 everything that we are doing
 
 
the social emotional well-being of our
 
 students is of the utmost
 
 importance to us as well as of our staff
 
 and we have
 
 surveyed students
 
 and we are looking to survey further the
 
 rest of our staff to just find out what
 
 are some of those underlying issues or
 
 concerns that people have
 
 
so we can ensure that we have our mental
 
 health staff there for supports
 
 
unfortunately we we will have to stress
 
 that students may not share materials at
 
 this time
 
 students will be assigned 
their own
 
 independent math workbooks
 
 and guided reading baggies 
will be
 
 provided weekly so that we have time to
 
 
interchange them out
 
 clean them up and leave them for the
 
 weekend so that there's a two to
 
 three day lag before the
 
 children pick up a new baggie and in
 
 those items we will integrate as always
 
 in our literacy and our math
 
 our science and social studies topics
 
 
whenever possible
 
 this will be in addition to the strong
 
 direct instruction that our classroom
 
 teachers provide already
 
 all all students will be benchmarked for
 
 their ela and their math to identify
 
 their present learning levels
 
 curriculum will be retard as needed we
 
 definitely know that this will need to
 
 
occur for math
 
 
and we have provided some slides in the
 
 past that show you that we're fortunate
 
 
we created our own math curriculum here
 
 a couple of years back 
and we know 
 
 
the
 
 
the one to two units that each grade
 
 level will probably need to go back to
 
 so that if i'm coming into second grade
 
 
i'm certainly not going to be able to
 
 start on my second grade math curriculum
 
 
i'll need to be re-taught some of the
 
 materials from when i was in first grade
 
 and for literacy once the teacher knows
 
 
the collective
 
 levels of what they have in their room
 
 
they will be able to
 
 accommodate those literacy lessons
 
 around that
 
 art and music will be a push in again to
 
 minimize the flow
 
 
and we are currently working with our
 
 art music departments
 
 
this is one that was a really tough hit
 
 music has to be 12 feet apart for any
 
 coral
 
 or any sort of wind instruments we are
 
 working our hardest with that department
 
 
we are very fortunate here 
we have a
 
 very strong music program and we do not
 
 want to see that diminish
 
 
and so we are looking for ways to think
 
 out of the box in order to be able to
 
 offer course opportunities that might be
 
 in smaller sections
 
 and different ways to offer lessons as
 
 
but we have provided and are
 
 keeping all lesson areas in the
 
 elementary schools
 
 so that students can still maintain
 
 lessons as needed
 
 
physical education will be a mix of
 
 separating two classes typically that
 
 are adjoined
 
 
so one class will be in the gym one
 
 class will be outside and inclement
 
 weather
 
 
they will rotate between the gym and in
 
 the classroom 
 
 mr butel and miss mcentee have reworked
 
 their curriculum
 
 to ensure that all team sports will be
 
 done in the spring 
so all of those units
 
 will be taught in the spring
 
 and 
in the beginning it will be 
more
 
 personal fitness
 
 traditional grading will also return for
 
 our students
 
 while we know that there may be some
 
 interruption in terms of what model
 
 our students may have to face where we
 
 hear rumors that we may have to go to
 
 distance learning sometime later in the
 
 fall
 
 
we fully believe that by using google
 
 classroom no matter what we will be able
 
 to make that seamless transition
 
 to distance learning should we need and
 
 we are well prepared as opposed to when
 
 the crisis first happened and most
 
 school districts were really just
 
 grasping at straws
 
 
but we also know that the accountability
 
 is something that is very important to
 
 
our students
 
 very important to our community and
 
 especially to our students who are at
 
 the high school level
 
 as i said before google classroom will
 
 be utilized for communication at both
 
 the building principle
 
 and classroom teacher level 
we really
 
 want to make sure that parents are on
 
 one medium so that they can see any
 
 communication
 
 email messages lessons etc
 
 and at this time we are going to enforce
 
 to ensure for the safety of our staff
 
 and other students
 
 that any sort of instruction that is
 
 done on google classroom or virtually
 
 that our students adhere to our district
 
 code of conduct
 
 when students this year sign on families
 
 sign on to look at schedules
 
 they will be asked and prompted to sign
 
 off on certain measures
 
 around this
 
 i just wanted to share with you
 
 some of our pictures that
 
 john and i took as we went around in our
 
 walkthroughs 
these are some samples of
 
 
our our elementary classrooms
 
 
again they're not decorated yet of
 
 course 
but you can see that we have
 
 
removed a lot of
 
 the traditional you know wonderful items
 
 that we would see in a classroom
 
 
but again we really wanted to maximize
 
 space and ensure that the teacher had
 
 space in the front of where their smart
 
 boards are and then also making sure
 
 that kids had room and were not
 
 you know pushed up too too much 
so we
 
 still are adjusting that
 
 once every single classroom is created
 
 at the building level
 
 we will be returning mr o'keefe and i
 
 with our team to just ensure that
 
 everybody has space both the teacher in
 
 the front of the room
 
 and then students around 
so again we are
 
 fortunate here
 
 
we do believe that we have enough staff
 
 to move forward and should
 
 the numbers for remote learning ensure
 
 even more flexibility
 
 
we may be able to open up more sections
 
 in our elementary schools and at our
 
 secondary levels bringing back more
 
 secondary students
 
 
this is at one more of the elementary
 
 school and to the right there you will
 
 see
 
 a classroom at the secondary level 
 
 
this particular sample is where we
 
 marked
 
 it the a and b desks so that students
 
 will be sitting 
and then it will make it
 
 a little bit easier for
 
 cleaning at night for our custodial
 
 staff
 
 
this is this is also a little bit
 
 of a tough share here because i know
 
 that we've been getting a lot of
 
 questions
 
 about child care and upk 
first child
 
 care we
 
 are still going to be providing am npm
 
 child care
 
 by boce by scope educational services
 
 
they continue to offer right now child
 
 care throughout the pandemic for our
 
 essential workers
 
 and they are happy to move forward to
 
 offer this
 
 services for all of our students at this
 
 point though we are
 
 on hold for our upk program and 
that is
 
 not because we don't have the space or
 
 
we don't want to 
but we simply have not
 
 received the allocations yet from the
 
 state and that is how we are able to run
 
 our our upk program while we do have
 
 
many students who do a tuition based
 
 into the program 
it is simply not enough
 
 to substantiate the program 
should we
 
 not get the allocations
 
 
so we are advising parents at this time
 
 
i know i've 
i've answered many phone
 
 calls many emails
 
 if you are need if you need care if you
 
 would like your child to go to an
 
 alternate preschool
 
 
now is the time to seek that out just to
 
 be safe however
 
 
if we were to find out about the
 
 allocations tomorrow we would also be
 
 able to implement that
 
 you know moving forward 
so we have
 
 not changed anything we're not changing
 
 
any spaces at this time
 
 
we're just kind of on a standstill
 
 
but to be safe
 
 
we just encourage you to look just in
 
 case excuse me ms hines 
 
 actually since we last spoke
 
 earlier today
 
 
i spoke to mr duffy he's the
 
 executive director of scope and runs our
 
 upk program
 
 just trying to see if he's heard
 
 anything further about the program
 
 and he has not heard much more than
 
 we have as a matter of fact 
there was a
 
 meeting earlier in the day with the
 
 suffolk county superintendents
 
 as well as 
mr wix who's the regional
 
 superintendent for eastern suffolk boces
 
 to see what boces knew about upk funding
 
 and 
again their contacts in albany have
 
 been very very quiet on it
 
 
the only information they've received is
 
 you know
 
 floating a balloon from albany that
 
 they're considering
 
 opening upk up 
but they may only fund it
 
 at 80 percent
 
 of what the grant would be so that would
 
 mean if the district wanted to move
 
 forward
 
 that would be an expense that was not
 
 budgeted for and we'd have to make a
 
 determination
 
 you know to take those monies from
 
 elsewhere to support the program
 
 
so it sounds like they're getting closer
 
 to a final decision
 
 
but i'd have to keep the border prize
 
 
so it might be a model in which
 
 we'd have to support 20 of the program
 
 to make it move forward 
so i'll keep you
 
 posted on that
 
 thank you mr 
o'keefe and then on
 
 to now 
our boces cte program 
so those
 
 are our students
 
 because we do have two we have cte
 
 programs that we house ourselves
 
 
they will still remain on the a b
 
 schedule but the but the bose cte
 
 programs where students get on the bus
 
 and go to boces
 
 boces did alert us last week that they
 
 will be providing that in
 
 house they do have the room so that
 
 will be live every day
 
 and for those students we will still
 
 have busing from our high schools to and
 
 from the program
 
 
we at this time though say that we may
 
 need family support in terms of if your
 
 child
 
 might need a ride to school if they are
 
 going to the program in the afternoon or
 
 alternately
 
 that is that is not solidified mr
 
 o'keefe and mr savone
 
 are looking at that through
 
 transportation to see if we might be
 
 able to accommodate and pick up
 
 individual students at their homes
 
 
that would only be for those choosing
 
 remote learning right 
only those
 
 choosing remotely thank you
 
 so here 
i 
just i share the
 
 hyperlinks that you will see
 
 on on the presentation that that
 
 we've sent home
 
 for the sake of time 
i'm not going to
 
 
go through all of these links but the
 
 top is a sample of our health screening
 
 form
 
 and the bottom of our all the protocol
 
 visuals a sample of them that we have
 
 smattered around every single building
 
 and so for our next steps as we said
 
 
this morning we finished our planning
 
 committee meeting where we
 
 laid out the the final steps here with
 
 
our district leaders and
 
 our volunteers our board of education
 
 pres
 
 presentation is is now as you can see
 
 
and then we also have a live community
 
 forum on monday
 
 at seven o'clock and we will be live
 
 streaming it similarly here
 
 
however i would envision that we would
 
 be a little closer that so that you can
 
 see us
 
 a little bit more clear but on friday
 
 we will be sending out a survey just
 
 asking community members for
 
 questions that they have we will collate
 
 those into
 
 subject areas and we will look to our
 
 best answer any questions that you have
 
 as well as our building administration
 
 will be delivering a common q a
 
 sort of like fact sheet about further
 
 details pertaining to
 
 to the buildings and this will include
 
 sample schedules for all of our students
 
 orientations how those will go out for
 
 
our grade six on our grade 
nine
 
 
some of that will be virtual and some of
 
 that will still be activities just
 
 broken up into smaller increments at the
 
 building
 
 as well as arrival and dismissal times
 
 and bell schedules for secondary
 
 students
 
 and then lastly as governor cuomo had
 
 ordered on friday
 
 
we are in the process of updating our
 
 district website for protocols for any
 
 symptomatic individuals
 
 testing we are not responsible per se
 
 for testing ourselves
 
 
but we are responsible for offering a
 
 plan 
should a student or a staff member
 
 go home
 
 
they are required to go get testing
 
 where that could occur and then of
 
 course they can't come back into school
 
 until testing results have been provided
 
 and then contact tracing as well
 
 
so that is the end of our
 
 presentation this evening
 
 
we look forward to speaking and sharing
 
 some more and clarifying more for you as
 
 the rest of the night goes on
 
 and then on monday as well at seven
 
 o'clock
 
 
did i 
my apologies let me go back 
i
 
 
i didn't realize that i think i got
 
 caught up in what we were saying about
 
 upk before
 
 
so my apologies these are some
 
 additional details about our secondary
 
 return
 
 and again with the utmost priority
 
 being the social and emotional
 
 well-being of our students
 
 in grades 
six to eight 
we will be
 
 benchmarking for
 
 
we do that through a literacy
 
 management system that we have
 
 and also for math 
all of our math
 
 departments
 
 have benchmarking type assessments that
 
 they do in the beginning of the year 
and
 
 again this will be to identify
 
 present learning levels in grades seven
 
 to 12 curriculum adjustments
 
 may be made for applicable areas where
 
 prior learning needs to be had
 
 
so for example in our math and our
 
 science classes
 
 there may need to be some learning from
 
 the prior year's
 
 regents bearing class 
and so we would be
 
 looking to look at
 
 curriculum around that and possibly
 
 offer review classes for our students as
 
 
 
 again traditional grading will return
 
 
students may not share 
so we will be
 
 limiting textbook use
 
 
and we'll be taking advantage of all of
 
 
the online subscriptions that we have
 
 physical education again very much like
 
 elementary school will be a mix of the
 
 gym
 
 outside fields and other large area use
 
 instrumental lessons very similar to
 
 elementary we are working with that
 
 department to ensure that lessons will
 
 occur they do need to be 12 feet if they
 
 are wind and or choral in nature
 
 and again we will be looking to figure
 
 out ways in order to still offer those
 
 choral groups
 
 but 
in a modified version google
 
 classroom will continue to be utilized
 
 for
 
 communication with both the principal
 
 and the classroom teacher
 
 again for a seamless transition should
 
 we ever be ordered into distance
 
 learning
 
 lockers will mostly be used for am and
 
 pickup only
 
 that's not to say that if a student
 
 really needed to go back we would not
 
 allow them to but again just trying to
 
 minimize the flow
 
 and minimize how much our students are
 
 putting into the lockers
 
 so we would envision some form of
 
 outerwear that's appropriate for that
 
 time
 
 and modified or or very 
 
 
you know slight binders and or folders
 
 notebooks that they need
 
 stagger grades again in times of
 
 at the end of the period we would be
 
 announcing
 
 grades so that they can come out into
 
 the hallways 
so
 
 that would mean that we would be at
 
 
the end of the period
 
 starting it a little bit earlier so that
 
 we can allow each grade level to
 
 disperse into the hallway to their next
 
 period
 
 about that 
 
 so that still is the end of our
 
 presentation
 
 
we hope that this did clarify some
 
 further information for you we are
 
 appreciative of the support
 
 and the time that the community offered
 
 us to be able to digest everything and
 
 wait for the orders 
so we can bring this
 
 to you 
tonight
 
 thank you questions from the board
 
 questions from the board is 
anybody jim
 
 
a john on the upk right now the way
 
 
that's funded is
 
 
correct me if i'm wrong like a six
 
 hundred thousand dollar grant
 
 
primarily we get a six hundred thousand
 
 dollar grant we hold a lottery
 
 that allots 252 families a spot in the
 
 program
 
 
we have more interest than that annually
 
 but families beyond the 253
 
 are able to participate for the same
 
 rate which is about
 
 twenty four hundred dollars per family
 
 for the year
 
 
so if if the governor
 
 would give us 80 percent
 
 of that that would mean that the
 
 district would have to come up with a
 
 hundred and twenty thousand dollars
 
 correct but are you in that hundred
 
 twenty thousand dollars
 
 
are we counting that that the lottery
 
 people
 
 are not paying tuition that would still
 
 be the lottery people
 
 not paying right so in other words the
 
 120 000 could be reduced
 
 if the lottery people were willing to
 
 pay a tuition fee
 
 
that was a model the board chose to
 
 
go with 
 
 
thank you
 
 just to figure back on what security was
 
 
saying
 
 if they were to to to 
 
 take twenty percent of that we'd be
 
 looking at about 479 thousand two
 
 hundred is what we'll be looking at
 
 which is
 
 
what accommodate 201 kids you were
 
 saying that you were concerned that we
 
 we might not be able to raise the funds
 
 to be able to
 
 
you know manage the program and have
 
 enough you know what i mean you'd
 
 have to redo the lottery 
then i
 
 
i wouldn't i don't know 
if would
 
 necessity 
would you want to use the same
 
 number 
then cut it off 
 
 
i set off at just 201 
and then and then
 
 open it up at 237.69
 
 per per family per month 
we could
 
 examine any model that the board wanted
 
 to take a look at
 
 
certainly those other families had
 
 already been notified that they were
 
 among the families chosen
 
 for the free program that's the worst
 
 
the worst case scenario would be correct
 
 but let's say they take all the funding
 
 and 
and they don't 
and
 
 one of the concerns to have it 
i mean
 
 have we thought about reaching out to
 
 some of our state elected officials
 
 flanagan
 
 or doug smith to find out if they can
 
 get us
 
 clarification from the governor's office
 
 as to whether or not he's going to fight
 
 
we can certainly continue
 
 to reach out quite honestly during much
 
 of this crisis
 
 much of them 
have been rather silent we
 
 haven't been able to get a lot of
 
 information
 
 
the governor isn't sharing much with
 
 other people other than when he decides
 
 to put it out
 
 via press conference 
i mean normally our
 
 local representatives are very helpful
 
 in
 
 getting information for us unfortunately
 
 hadn't been able to get information for
 
 
us 
but it's certainly worth
 
 
trying 
i mean we're two weeks before the
 
 start of school 
and you've got 252
 
 families
 
 not knowing whether or not they have 
a
 
 pre-k 
 
 i mean i don't know 
you know how the
 
 board feels 
but i personally think that
 
 you would get
 
 252 families even if they took all 599
 
 000
 
 because at 237 a month for half day
 
 pre-k
 
 
it's still a great great opportunity
 
 
and i can't and now more than ever
 
 and and would be willing to work with us
 
 if there was zero funding 
and we had
 
 enough participation
 
 to still run the program 
would can
 
 
we include something like that in the
 
 survey
 
 
sits some of the families out there to
 
 
see what the interests would be we could
 
 do a separate survey i wouldn't want to
 
 
you know not on the same survey
 
 put it out as a separate survey
 
 specifically targeted to those families
 
 that are already in the process
 
 
i have a follow-up to that where are we
 
 putting all these students
 
 if our classes are maxed out at this
 
 time
 
 
we still have not reappropriated those
 
 classes we do have a couple of buildings
 
 because
 
 of additional special education sections
 
 that we needed that we moved the classes
 
 
but we have not taken away those class
 
 spaces yet 
so if we
 
 were to go with the will of the board to
 
 
you know put out a survey
 
 and go with a tuition base 
we would be
 
 
you know all set to go
 
 
i just had a quick question 
 
 about the bus
 
 and 
what is the busing going to look
 
 
 
 
i mean again it'll also depend on
 
 participation 
you know we put out a
 
 survey to the parents
 
 a week or so 
ago i think we had nine
 
 thousand
 
 respondents in in very brief order 
 
 in that survey about a third of the
 
 families 
 
 considered possibly keeping their
 
 children home
 
 of the two-thirds willing to send
 
 their children
 
 in 65 of those
 
 said they would use the bus 
the other 35
 
 said they would drive their children to
 
 school
 
 
so just some quick math 
you're only
 
 looking at 4 500 kids
 
 interested in using the bus based on
 
 those numbers i mean they could change
 
 when we put out the new survey and
 
 
it could be that you know parents first
 
 stop that they don't want to use the bus
 
 and 
then during the year maybe they
 
 start 
you know they need the bus
 
 
so we're not reducing the number of
 
 bus 
runs all the runs that have been
 
 budgeted for
 
 would be running but 
with those
 
 numbers you'd end up
 
 literally with just about one child per
 
 seat
 
 
you know 
so 
and then you also take into
 
 account 
remote
 
 
you'll get routed for 44 students
 
 so in the worst case scenario
 
 
there could be two pupils in each seat
 
 
but based on
 
 the information we're receiving i don't
 
 think there'll be that participation
 
 just some clarification so
 
 with the custodial staff cleaning each
 
 night so they're going to have
 
 more to do than they did prior have we
 
 increased the custodial staff
 
 since their job description will be
 
 different to do
 
 a more deeper cleaning every day daily
 
 versus
 
 unfortunately 
that was one of the
 
 items that was pulled back
 
 on the budget 
so obviously we may need
 
 to take a look at that again
 
 
we were rating 10 custodians and then
 
 when there was issues
 
 where we even today we still don't know
 
 
what our state funding is
 
 and we still have the potential of a
 
 looming 20 percent cut
 
 
we decided if you remember
 
 back to january and february 
we were
 
 talking about this 
we were adding one
 
 extra custodian each building
 
 that was one of our
 
 enhancements for this year's budget 
we
 
 did draw that back
 
 
so we're going to work with the staff
 
 
we have work with the
 
 substitute staff we have 
and you know
 
 
man it as best as possible
 
 to optimize cleaning and then
 
 with the secondary schools where
 
 you have the a b
 
 desks next to each other 
so that means
 
 if i am an a student 
and i sit in
 
 only the a 
and then the next day the b
 
 desk comes in that image might change
 
 though
 
 i was going to say that that was really
 
 more so that we can show a visual to the
 
 families how we were spacing it out in
 
 the beginning
 
 
those desks we would see needing to be
 
 reappropriated and put into our
 
 our lunchrooms different other areas
 
 where we're going to need to
 
 
reappropriate other space 
the library
 
 different items like that
 
 
so i don't i don't necessarily think
 
 
we were just at north today
 
 and in the classrooms that we walked
 
 around in with miss trombetta 
there was
 
 
only about 15 to
 
 16 desks in in each classroom 
 
 
that was an initial setup when we were
 
 trying to figure out what it would look
 
 or how we could divide them up
 
 
but in fact with the style of cafeteria
 
 tables we have
 
 
it 
it really prohibits the number of
 
 children that can eat in the cafeteria
 
 
we believe we're going to take all the
 
 cafeteria tables out of those secondary
 
 cafeterias and store them
 
 and put in desks 
i mean it's not going
 
 
to be the most attractive
 
 lunchroom it'll be set up more like a
 
 testing room where children will be
 
 
spaced six feet apart
 
 right with classroom desks
 
 correct 
but we do anticipate that we
 
 would be able to offer breaks for
 
 you know students to be able to go
 
 outside and go into any of the
 
 recreation areas items like that
 
 elimination 
and so then in the
 
 secondary schools if the kids are
 
 changing classrooms will the desk
 
 get wiped down between
 
 
each change or how does that work in the
 
 cafeteria
 
 not in the classrooms that
 
 
would that would technically be not
 
 possible 
i mean there's
 
 
3 000 desks in high school and 1600 or
 
 
so in
 
 in a middle school that just wouldn't be
 
 
the means in that four or five minutes
 
 of passing
 
 
to wipe down those tables 
but if we
 
 student would want to do their own
 
 destiny
 
 
the materials will be in the classroom
 
 
we are providing that 
for every
 
 classroom
 
 and then one last question 
sorry
 
 
everybody 
it's okay
 
 
if a staff or a student happens to test
 
 positive
 
 that would then be reported and then the
 
 cdc would guide us on what we had to do
 
 or we have our own plan how does
 
 that work the department of health
 
 the department of health department of
 
 health 
so they would tell us
 
 
so if it's one student in one
 
 classroom 
right
 
 
that may be different than a student in
 
 a middle school who
 
 passes through a hall or mrs clayton's
 
 become an expert on the matter
 
 
so the department of health and
 
 and the new york state and the federal
 
 requirements require us to make reports
 
 for certain things
 
 
and they require the medical treatment
 
 provider the doctor who's performed the
 
 diagnosis for a positive result to
 
 report information to
 
 reporting for contact tracing 
so
 
 
therefore our obligation
 
 
we go above and beyond to make sure that
 
 even if for some reason
 
 the medical treatment provider has not
 
 contacted the
 
 contact tracing 
we will
 
 just check you know belt and suspenders
 
 that we have provided some insight in
 
 case 
there's an instance
 
 
the other thing is when the lab results
 
 come back 
the lab results
 
 are supposed to be also provided to
 
 the contact tracing at which point
 
 the department of health would be or
 
 enter cdc would be contacting tracers
 
 and determining
 
 who they would contact including
 
 students or staff
 
 or family or whoever they came into
 
 contact with
 
 
can i can i pick you back on that
 
 question quick thank you very much
 
 so on the checklist that we do daily
 
 
let's just say 
rob 
and i are in a
 
 classroom 
and i find out that
 
 he test positive for covid the next day
 
 when my parents are filling out the
 
 check sheet 
and it says
 
 have you come in contact with anybody
 
 
that's tested positive will that prevent
 
 my entrance into the building
 
 if you're saying you tested positive
 
 if you're saying you're tested
 
 
i mean 
 
 
i'm not gonna tell you that rob
 
 testifies we're not allowed to tell you
 
 
i mean i came to learn it it becomes
 
 common knowledge of who it was
 
 
and now i have to honestly fill out
 
 
the sheet 
i mean i'm have to now
 
 have to say i did come into contact
 
 with some of the department of health
 
 guidelines for close contact and this
 
 is where it gets a little squirrelly
 
 because you know
 
 
are we in close contact are we in close
 
 contact
 
 their criteria for close contact is less
 
 than six feet for 15 minutes or more
 
 
so we'll have to look at each of
 
 those one at a time
 
 
and i can foresee the department of
 
 health as soon as schools open
 
 
you know becoming overwhelmed with calls
 
 from districts all around the state
 
 just trying to get feedback and
 
 
answers 
so we're building
 
 criteria and protocols with our nursing
 
 staff with our personnel staff
 
 
you know so we can make some of these
 
 decisions on our own 
we have handled
 
 situations already
 
 even during summer school programs 
so
 
 
it's not that we're unfamiliar with how
 
 to do it
 
 
we've had staff members with with covid
 
 
so it's just going to be on a bigger
 
 scale now 
that's all
 
 and 
also just to mention mr block is
 
 with us this evening from ingram and
 
 smith 
he has been
 
 
our one of our main contacts that we've
 
 been triaging information between
 
 the state 
the federal what we have in
 
 
our schools what we can do
 
 and what we can't do and trying to find
 
 the best scenario for our students and
 
 our staff 
and we'll continue to do so
 
 
and i promise this is my last question
 
 
so
 
 
if a parent chooses the remote learning
 
 
 
 they have to commit to that for the year
 
 
they can't change their mind like after
 
 the first marking period
 
 they're committing to that 
and then
 
 their student 
 
 cannot participate in let's say spring
 
 sports
 
 
so i think in in the beginning of
 
 the guidance it said that students may
 
 not be able to
 
 may not be able to enter into
 
 activities or sports
 
 we know now that that is not the case
 
 and that
 
 if a child is remote they're still a
 
 student of ours we're not really going
 
 
to have any activities 
so we don't
 
 foresee that being an issue
 
 
so it's really more for sports but miss
 
 trombetta who
 
 sits on the community 
four section
 
 has shared with us information in
 
 terms of
 
 how they're looking at that language and
 
 how we would not be prohibited most
 
 likely from
 
 keeping children back from sports in
 
 september 
and then the child plays a
 
 spring sport
 
 and then come the spring sports are up
 
 and running and you tell the child they
 
 can't play
 
 and just know that when we write
 
 that we're looking to make it more of a
 
 commitment that could be up to a year
 
 that is because we don't want to give
 
 the misnomer that if a child says i
 
 want
 
 you know a family to say that they want
 
 to be remote in a week 
and then they
 
 change their mind 
they want to do it
 
 
another week we will look at each case
 
 
but it would be very challenging for us
 
 to bring back
 
 large numbers of students who think who
 
 feel they might have made a poor choice
 
 because that would shift all of our
 
 classrooms and all of our teaching staff
 
 
i would totally agree with that i
 
 
just didn't know if it would be like
 
 after every
 
 marking period reevaluated but 
if the
 
 parent does commit i just don't want to
 
 hurt the student
 
 of course by saying if 
 
 extracurricular comes back in spring
 
 your parent made this choice in
 
 september and now you can't participate
 
 right
 
 
and 
and i think for us you know being
 
 
just 
 
 of mine that things could shift very
 
 easily 
we could look to
 
 
look at that come january and it may not
 
 need to be a year-long commitment 
but we
 
 did want to write it down so that
 
 parents were aware
 
 
all right thank you very much 
thank you
 
 for sharing this with us
 
 
i have two questions or concerns 
 
 when this plan was developed
 
 to return to school k through five the
 
 ada b day
 
 
it wasn't based on surveys that went out
 
 as to
 
 
the number of parents that think they
 
 would choose remote or not choose remote
 
 it was based on our entire population
 
 so conceivably
 
 if we have a a 6 through 12
 
 model of a day b day hypothetically
 
 
every parent said i want my kids to
 
 return to school
 
 
we can we can accommodate all of them in
 
 an ajb day
 
 
you mean physically back into school 
no
 
 
we wouldn't be able to do that
 
 
how would we physically bring them all
 
 back 
we don't have 
so
 
 at the elementary level 
just very simple
 
 math we have to
 
 take out about five to six seven kids
 
 out of each classroom in order to be
 
 able to accommodate that average size
 
 
my question a little bit on the six
 
 through twelve model-
 
 
it that was based upon returning every
 
 single child to school
 
 so if friday the survey is
 
 if we have if we have more children now
 
 
i understand you thank you
 
 
so if we have more children who are
 
 going to be on remote 
we could
 
 conceivably 
and i know we discussed this
 
 this morning in our committee 
we could
 
 look to bring back more
 
 students 
my question is that my
 
 concern is the same as laura is having a
 
 one-year commitment i received
 
 a half a dozen phone calls today 
 
 probably in the last couple hours about
 
 
i'm concerned about the one-year
 
 commitment we know
 
 that you know in remote learning it
 
 says
 
 remote instruction is not equivalent to
 
 in-person hybrid instruction
 
 
right 
so it's not the same level 
right
 
 
so for forcing kids out of school what
 
 we're doing 
is we're creating a bigger
 
 educational gap for the following year
 
 
we're not forcing that would be a
 
 parent's choice but the thing is we
 
 allow them to come back after each
 
 quarter
 
 if we're able to accommodate them
 
 according to the way the plan was
 
 
designed
 
 why wouldn't we allow them come back
 
 after after one quarter so they can get
 
 that i didn't think we said that we
 
 wouldn't be allowing we said that it
 
 would be really prohibitive for us to be
 
 able to reschedule them back into
 
 classrooms
 
 
but we could look at it based on the
 
 numbers that we have we wanted to be
 
 honest
 
 
mr scavo and let families know that this
 
 could be a year-long commitment
 
 and most districts are looking at that
 
 at either january or the year long
 
 because it is very disruptive
 
 that would mean having to up just move
 
 around the entire schedule for
 
 
you know our schools which we may
 
 still have to do 
should covert
 
 restrictions be lifted
 
 
but you wouldn't want to recant 
and we
 
 know that that happened quite a bit
 
 where in the beginning of all this
 
 debacle we were putting out information
 
 and then
 
 something you know alternatively was
 
 shared 
but i think we just said before
 
 with
 
 miss slattery that of course if we could
 
 look at it by quarter 
and we felt like
 
 
it wasn't going to be a tremendous feat
 
 for our families that we would do that
 
 
but i think that that's not probably
 
 what a parent is going to make their
 
 choice on
 
 
if i'm choosing to be remote 
it's
 
 
because i'm thinking that it's unsafe
 
 for my child to be at school
 
 
so i'm hoping that by these presentation
 
 slides that we have people will see that
 
 we've made tremendous
 
 tremendous you know strides in making
 
 sure that our schools are safe they're
 
 clean and we're doing routine protocols
 
 to ensure that
 
 but the commitment is a year that's what
 
 this time for right now 
 
 
so if something changes at home a
 
 person that's furloughed now has to go
 
 back to work
 
 
they want to and their their
 
 impression is going to be that they
 
 can't return because they signed the
 
 paper saying
 
 that they have a one-year commitment to
 
 be at 
but i mean i think though
 
 
if if there's something along those
 
 lines and we all get 
those calls all the
 
 time if there's a family that really is
 
 in enough need and feels like they made
 
 
the poor choice
 
 or not a poor choice they made the wrong
 
 choice for what their their thing is
 
 going on right now 
so whether
 
 a parent goes back furloughed or their
 
 child is just not doing well in remote
 
 learning and they were to contact us
 
 
just like any other parent phone call
 
 that we would have of course 
we would
 
 look at every case individually
 
 
but i'm talking as a whole 
we could not
 
 say
 
 
you're going to be a remote 
and then if
 
 you choose to decide in masses that you
 
 want to come back 
we just would not be
 
 able to run the same schedule 
and then
 
 we would be restarting everything over
 
 again
 
 the reason why i bring this up 
is i
 
 watched the the newsday webinar
 
 yesterday
 
 
we had dr johnson 
i finally heard all
 
 about him
 
 
i got a chance to see him in the
 
 presentation along with a psychiatrist
 
 along with a the superintendent of north
 
 babylon and that exact question came up
 
 right and a lot of the experts were
 
 saying i would not go past
 
 a semester in fact a lot of districts
 
 are going quarterly
 
 
you know 
and i just don't i just don't
 
 want to influence a person's decision
 
 because they're fearful that
 
 if they sign that paper they're not
 
 going to be able to come back because
 
 the reality of it is 
is that
 
 you know when we look at the education
 
 of even a day b day
 
 my concern is that as a teacher you
 
 can't teach the entire curriculum
 
 
and now we're talking about prior
 
 learning being re-taught from the
 
 previous year
 
 how you and you're never going to be
 
 able to teach the the entire curriculum
 
 but the kids that at home that are not
 
 getting the same equivalency of
 
 education
 
 
are going to be further behind the
 
 following year and which all we're going
 
 to do is create a a snowball effect
 
 
and that's my concern 
i mean you know 
i
 
 
personally would like you know the
 
 opportunity
 
 
that if they if they come back after if
 
 they're the first quarter
 
 which is a 10-week period or nine-week
 
 period 
i think it would be a little more
 
 settling for the people in the community
 
 knowing that all right this remote's
 
 not learning i committed to a year
 
 
now i'm stuck 
well 
i mean i think i
 
 think two things right because i agree
 
 with you 
i don't think anybody wants to
 
 
be in the position where we can't
 
 welcome back students interchangeably as
 
 they need
 
 
and we definitely know that no matter
 
 what happens curriculum is going to be
 
 interrupted this year
 
 
that is a safe bet but if we play
 
 if it's the will of the board if it's
 
 
the will of the board to change that 
and
 
 you would like to make that language
 
 more flexible
 
 
we're happy to do that but know
 
 that we've taken 
you know quite a
 
 concealed amount of time to making sure
 
 we would prefer our students not to be
 
 on remote 
but if a family really chooses
 
 and needs to choose that we honor and we
 
 respect that
 
 absolutely 
but i mean nobody
 
 wants to do that 
but
 
 nobody's the size of sagem either 
and so
 
 we have different restrictions
 
 
that's why the question was the plan
 
 design based on the entire
 
 
it was it was based on of if all
 
 students were going to be a full return
 
 
then we would have to go in an a b day
 
 if we are finding though that we have
 
 remote
 
 students at a quantity where we can
 
 bring back students
 
 even an additional day or or by grade
 
 level seniors first ninth graders 
first
 
 
you know however we look to plan through
 
 
that then that's would be our next step
 
 
so just like what we were saying earlier
 
 in our remote instruction
 
 
it's going to be hard to match up
 
 
what exactly the model will look like
 
 until we have the survey results from
 
 our teachers and for our families 
so we
 
 can match it up
 
 certification-wise 
my biggest concern is
 
 
we have kids taking ap exams
 
 and getting those kids ready for that
 
 and getting those kids ready for the
 
 next level college
 
 
you know we we have training as
 
 much face time with with staff
 
 
it's absolutely 
i agree with you 
and i'm
 
 
very
 
 
i'm very thankful you know working
 
 with the scta if we
 
 ever have to think about distance
 
 
learning the fact that we'll be
 
 providing two and a half hours every day
 
 for our students 
so
 
 running the same schedule 
just shortened
 
 periods you know working on google
 
 classroom interchangeably now and
 
 consistently across all of our
 
 classrooms
 
 
you know 
just right now currently we
 
 have a tremendous amount of teachers
 
 
that are
 
 undergoing pd virtually to ensure that
 
 everything is is up and running and that
 
 they feel
 
 clarified and supported in that kind of
 
 work 
but
 
 you're preaching to the choir i couldn't
 
 agree with you more that this is a
 
 really challenging time i have a high
 
 schooler myself
 
 
and she's in a smaller district doing an
 
 a b schedule
 
 
so i scratch my head 
a lot right now
 
 
so i 
i completely
 
 respect and understand and if the board
 
 would like us to look at
 
 the year-long date just let us
 
 know 
and we'd be happy to accommodate no
 
 this this will go
 
 
the remote learning actually just
 
 went out that survey just went out 
but
 
 we can
 
 
i mean i could send it on on on remind
 
 in five minutes if we wanted to say you
 
 know that we've changed the date
 
 
but it sounds like 
maybe that needs
 
 to be more of a discussion 
if we're
 
 looking to go that route
 
 meredith engine and then jimmy
 
 
so on the remote learning if a parent
 
 were to
 
 choose that model 
i understand that
 
 we would want them to commit for the
 
 full year because we are
 
 devoting staff just to that remote
 
 learning we're not using
 
 a teacher who may be inside the
 
 classroom sometimes
 
 
we're going to utilize the staff that
 
 for whatever reason has to be
 
 staying at home to be our remote
 
 teachers
 
 
that's the optimal plan 
right so at the
 
 elementary level
 
 it works a little bit easier in that
 
 in that
 
 fashion if i'm an elementary teacher and
 
 
i'm out i can conceivably
 
 teach any of those grade levels if i'm a
 
 librarian obviously that certification
 
 et cetera et cetera 
it gets a little
 
 trickier at the secondary level
 
 because if i'm a chemistry teacher and
 
 and i'm out 
and
 
 maybe i don't have as many students out
 
 for chemistry
 
 
you know then what am i giving to that
 
 teacher in terms of work that they would
 
 be doing for that day 
so one could say
 
 that she would
 
 switch what they're doing 
and now
 
 they're going to teach more science
 
 electives and they can support any of
 
 those
 
 students who are out needing science
 
 electives 
so it's really going to boil
 
 down to
 
 looking at the hard numbers of students
 
 
matched up with the
 
 teachers that we have 
should we not be
 
 able to match everybody up
 
 
which i'm hopeful we will be able to
 
 
then we would need to start entering
 
 into some sort of live streaming or
 
 larger groups of google classrooms where
 
 a teacher instead of having a class of
 
 maybe 25 or 26
 
 in a google classroom we may have to
 
 have larger numbers
 
 
and so then that's why the year-long
 
 decision or not doing it every quarter
 
 becomes very challenging for us
 
 if i'm a teacher 
and i'm running a
 
 google classroom of 45 kids
 
 and 
now some that those classrooms want
 
 to go back 
what classroom are they going
 
 into where am i fitting them into
 
 
so then you're having to change people's
 
 schedule
 
 
it's a lot of moving parts it is and
 
 then
 
 if so we have 
so children
 
 are able to through their parents choose
 
 whether they want to come back to school
 
 or not our teachers are not electing
 
 whether they're coming back to school
 
 the
 
 the teachers that are staying home to do
 
 
the remote learning are the teachers
 
 that have
 
 reasons why they cannot return
 
 and 
so even if tomorrow
 
 you know three weeks after school
 
 started 
all of our remote learners said
 
 
 
 this is for the birds i don't like this
 
 
i want to go back to school
 
 
we wouldn't then have the ability to
 
 bring them back because even though we
 
 did the classrooms for them
 
 
we wouldn't at that point have the
 
 ability 
would we well not at this time
 
 
because again with
 
 six feet we are you know down to the
 
 amount of numbers that we have 
but if if
 
 our numbers look as such where
 
 the remote learning is a larger
 
 quantity than
 
 our elementary classrooms let's say for
 
 
example instead of them being 17 that
 
 might only be 13
 
 or 14 
so then we could start welcoming
 
 them back 
but that would be based on
 
 
almost you know looking at each student
 
 individually and being able to see 
how
 
 we can
 
 schedule them back into school which is
 
 probably a very
 
 physical impossibility in the next three
 
 weeks 
it's 
a little hard
 
 
 
 with our secondary schools
 
 as a as a secondary mom 
it is
 
 
it it kind of does stink and there's no
 
 two ways about it 
our children no child
 
 is going to get the best education this
 
 year it's just not going to happen 
and
 
 something we're going to
 
 
try our best 
we'll definitely try
 
 our best right
 
 
if one
 
 let's say somerset had an influx of you
 
 
know
 
 80 percent of their kids wanted to stay
 
 home and remote 
learn
 
 that would open up a lot more room 
but
 
 it wouldn't necessarily mean that we
 
 would
 
 do somerset where their children win
 
 every single day
 
 and the rest of them we would be
 
 making decisions that are consistent for
 
 
all students 
but then we might be
 
 
reappropriating staff to help out
 
 in other ways in other areas and i
 
 don't want to put you on the spot 
but
 
 
it's okay
 
 
that's why we're here 
we're on the spot
 
 
have we looked into sixth grade at all
 
 because in my opinion sixth grade is
 
 
that lost
 
 grade 
it's a grade where they're a
 
 little too young to still stay home by
 
 themselves
 
 and not only just stay home for the day
 
 by themselves but also
 
 teach themselves kind of you know get on
 
 
this get on the schedule get on the
 
 computer 
do what you got to do keep
 
 yourself moving on that
 
 b day 
have we visited something that
 
 once we get all our numbers because i
 
 know we can't really finalize anything
 
 until we get all these surveys and
 
 numbers
 
 
but once we get all those numbers are we
 
 going to be able to maybe look at sixth
 
 grade
 
 going every day as a possibility 
 
 
that's absolutely 
you know 
that's
 
 definitely a conversation that we've
 
 been having as
 
 as soon as we know what the numbers are
 
 
will we be able to welcome back
 
 additional grades 
and i would i would
 
 assume that we would be having these
 
 conversations with with all of you our
 
 administrative team obviously as well
 
 and sixth grade is one of those that
 
 was a really
 
 hard thing to kind of cut off at
 
 because we know that they could be 10
 
 11 years old going into school and i
 
 would not feel comfortable
 
 myself at times leaving my child home
 
 for long periods
 
 
and so we've had those
 
 conversations 
and once we know the
 
 numbers
 
 we'll be able to come back and report if
 
 we're able to make any changes good
 
 thank you so much no problem
 
 just a quick question some clarification
 
 piggybacking a little bit on what
 
 mr scavo said are we
 
 entering the year making an assumption
 
 that we're not going to be able to
 
 deliver 100
 
 of content in regards to secondary
 
 curriculum
 
 
if that is the assumption that i think
 
 
you said that we're almost entering into
 
 
i mean who's going to choose what
 
 topics and what's being covered are we
 
 letting
 
 different teachers different people 
it
 
 
just it concerns me that we're
 
 
entering 
i know there's no perfect
 
 answer 
and there's no scenario that can
 
 right 
that under these circumstances
 
 that you've given you but
 
 i guess that makes more of mr scala's
 
 point is that
 
 if we're making the assumption that
 
 we're not going to be able to deliver
 
 content we should be trying to 
 
 wait till so many surveys come back and
 
 see how many kids we can actually get
 
 
and so i don't have a
 
 perfect answer for it 
but i can tell you
 
 what we're doing to set up for that
 
 
i had a chair meeting a couple of
 
 weeks ago so our instructional leaders
 
 in each department to talk about that
 
 especially at the secondary level
 
 
and so we would be looking at our
 
 curriculum at what are the big ideas at
 
 
the end of the school year what is it
 
 that the students are expected to learn
 
 so they can you know move forward and
 
 pass
 
 those classes and or regence exams 
we're
 
 
also hoping to have a little bit more
 
 guidance in terms of the state education
 
 department
 
 in terms of what they're going to do in
 
 relaxing standards and curriculum
 
 and testing so much in how they had
 
 canceled the regents we don't hope for
 
 that we hope more for choice
 
 so that these students who are working
 
 hard getting grades attending
 
 will be able to at least have a choice
 
 for regents if they want to take it 
and
 
 see what kind of grade they get
 
 
i don't i don't think we're looking i
 
 
don't think 
and i know 
you mean it this
 
 way 
but we're not assuming we're not
 
 going to be able to get through our
 
 curriculum 
but we want to be real with
 
 our families
 
 
the curriculum could look a little bit
 
 different than what it normally does
 
 
and i know our teachers again hard
 
 workers are already looking at that
 
 we've had some conversation for example
 
 around science lab hours usually 
that's
 
 seat time
 
 
now the state education department has
 
 relaxed that 
and that could be
 
 also a virtual 
so we've already started
 
 
those conversations
 
 
once we come back into schools in our
 
 department means that we've been having
 
 virtually
 
 
we'll continue those talks and start
 
 looking at that together
 
 so this at the secondary level state the
 
 new york state creates the standards for
 
 apn regions 
right
 
 
so haven't given us clarification
 
 
is through 
is through
 
 
the college board
 
 
and so we actually are starting as you
 
 know a new ap capstone program at the
 
 high school so those teachers that
 
 are gonna begin teaching it for us
 
 this year they just went through the
 
 training for that
 
 
and right now ap is holding tight to
 
 what they're doing 
but we also know that
 
 at the last minute they made some
 
 changes around what they did testing
 
 wise virtually
 
 
so we are advocating 
and i think mr
 
 
o'keefe spoke about this earlier
 
 while we have not heard a tremendous
 
 amount from our legislators at this time
 
 we have been advocating through our
 
 local boces our associations
 
 talking to talking to the college board
 
 and just hoping for some teamwork for
 
 relief
 
 so that families know that you know
 
 
we're not looking to make any decisions
 
 that are going to make impacts for the
 
 students 
but we also have to be real 
and
 
 they have to work with us
 
 
so we're hopeful for that no problem
 
 
aaron 
the so by the weekend we will have
 
 
the figures on how many people are
 
 opting for remote learning is that
 
 all and the way we have it now
 
 is they're being committed they can
 
 make a commitment
 
 for one full year just just for my
 
 identification
 
 let's suppose it came back to say 30
 
 percent of our district
 
 one which could be right which could be
 
 what it could be sure what does that
 
 change anything for us with the ab
 
 days or or or as meredith said the sixth
 
 grade
 
 situation would let's say 30 remote for
 
 the year 
would that
 
 change you know
 
 
what we're doing right now 
 
 absolutely so what i just said with
 
 business
 
 also gonna take you know 
where is the
 
 thirty percent it could be
 
 heavily weighted on the younger children
 
 you know is a k12 pet families
 
 deciding
 
 
they want to keep them home 
right you
 
 know it really depends on the breakdown
 
 of the of the groupings and the grades
 
 of where that 30 percent is
 
 or is it leaning more on one side of the
 
 district versus the other
 
 
it's not as clean as just if it was
 
 
thirty percent
 
 
but spaced across the district that
 
 would make it easier we can see
 
 
some movement 
i'm just not sure that i
 
 could say for sure right now that it
 
 would be at the secondary level we would
 
 
just need to see where it is
 
 and just aggregate that and just look at
 
 
it 
and it also boils down to to
 
 you know certification areas too as well
 
 how much staff we have in in each
 
 area 
i fully understand mr scala's
 
 position on that i really do understand
 
 
but i'm trying to
 
 trying to look at this as if you put out
 
 a survey
 
 tonight which is already gone 
but if you
 
 put it out
 
 
and it said your one mocking period and
 
 you could change your mind
 
 
then kind of i would say that you really
 
 
we're stuck with what we've got 
this is
 
 
this is the way it's got to be because
 
 you don't know
 
 from market period of marketing period
 
 
how many students you're going to have
 
 is that accurate i mean but
 
 but that goes to back to what we said
 
 
we can't put out there that you can make
 
 the decision after each quarter if we're
 
 not sure we're going to be able to offer
 
 that
 
 
and so i know it may have looked like it
 
 was a little bit stricter than it sounds
 
 
like the board was was willing to move
 
 forward with and so again we're
 
 certainly open to
 
 putting in alternate language and we
 
 could send it as as quick as you know as
 
 soon as we're done here or
 
 first thing in the morning 
i certainly
 
 don't want to prohibit anybody from not
 
 doing remote learning
 
 
but again it's 
it's 
we have to be
 
 practical in the size of our school
 
 district 
so we can't say
 
 
we're going to be able to offer things
 
 that smaller school districts can right
 
 away
 
 
but it is prohibitive based on on the
 
 numbers 
so 
 
 we might be able to offer that 
and we
 
 might be able to offer more grades into
 
 our secondary schools we might be able
 
 to offer
 
 more space for our elementary students
 
 
we just won't know until we see all of
 
 
those numbers
 
 getting to getting that number that
 
 we're seeking
 
 this weekend will drive 
 
 where we go next 
and that's why it's
 
 challenging to be able to share
 
 with our staff and 
with our community
 
 what remote learning will
 
 you know essentially look like as well
 
 
if i don't have enough staff i can't
 
 guarantee that you're going to be in a
 
 google classroom with a live teacher
 
 
i might not be able to offer that it may
 
 be based on whatever elective or store
 
 or grade that you're in 
it could be some
 
 sort of like a live streaming 
but
 
 
but again 
it really it depends on on the
 
 numbers of the students that we have
 
 up against our staff as well 
thank
 
 
you jim just just real fast to pick it
 
 back 
i apologize i walked out for a
 
 second
 
 if only 75 of the families respond to
 
 
the survey
 
 
so now there's 25 of the kids we don't
 
 
know what they're doing no the default
 
 is that they're coming to school
 
 thank you 
no problem
 
 
so i know with elementary the teachers
 
 usually take their lunch when the
 
 students
 
 have their lunch how are we working that
 
 if they're having a lunch in the
 
 classroom who will be supervising them
 
 
so we do have obviously aid support
 
 
we are also working with our principals
 
 because we know that we're probably
 
 going to need some additional
 
 help with that 
but we also 
 
 know that you know that
 
 lunch is managed 
i actually thought
 
 that there was
 
 some staff that was a part of the lunch
 
 periods
 
 that might be mistaken 
i'd have to
 
 
look at that 
but we are 
we are having
 
 conversation to ensure that we have
 
 
the support we need for lunch
 
 two 
more actually what will clubs look
 
 virtually
 
 
so that's 
that's another new and
 
 exciting question
 
 
we definitely know that clubs are
 
 not going to be able to be
 
 maintained after school physically 
we
 
 have
 
 started to work with an online platform
 
 called passport for good
 
 
and it allows clubs to run virtually and
 
 note on all their activities attendance
 
 community service hours if a child is
 
 working any of those types of hours
 
 
so we have to enter into conversation
 
 with our teachers about what that could
 
 look like
 
 
we certainly don't want to not offer
 
 clubs 
but you know
 
 
once a week twice a week what sort of
 
 activities how will you meet with them
 
 
will google me be a part of it 
those are
 
 the questions that we're looking to have
 
 moving forward around clubs and 
one more
 
 with the staggered start times
 
 those are students still changing for
 
 gym class
 
 we will not be changing for gym and we
 
 will not need to
 
 because we have moved team sports to the
 
 end and we're looking to do more
 
 
you know personal fitness that isn't
 
 rigorous
 
 
but we would not 
we would not be
 
 looking to have any
 
 any you know contact in that manner
 
 for our students
 
 [Music]
 
 as i sat here 
tonight i thought about
 
 saying absolutely nothing
 
 
and i really don't know where to begin i
 
 
don't have a specific question
 
 
i can tell you that i'm incredibly angry
 
 internally right now
 
 
and it's not at anybody in this room
 
 
but i thought that i haven't
 
 organized my thoughts 
completely they're
 
 
just bouncing around in my head
 
 
but i want to say a few things 
first i
 
 want to say that
 
 you did an outstanding job in the most
 
 difficult of circumstances you've put
 
 together a plan
 
 
every school district is in the same
 
 exact boat that we are in
 
 questions asked tonight by rob alex
 
 laura 
meredith
 
 
everybody here great questions
 
 
and we don't have the answers to any
 
 of those questions 
and we are going to
 
 be surprised i think
 
 greatly by the things that we find
 
 
i think that you know people could look
 
 at what's going on here tonight and they
 
 may think that
 
 all of us agree on this model and think
 
 that this is what we have to do
 
 
i'm sure there are people watching this
 
 tonight streaming 
or we'll watch it
 
 later on 
and they'll think that if
 
 you're sitting here i'm sitting here 
and
 
 i'm quiet
 
 that i must agree with this plan 
and i
 
 think it's wonderful
 
 
and i'm going to tell you that i don't
 
 
it's rotten 
it's a rotten plan
 
 
that's going to do tremendous damage to
 
 
our children
 
 
i've been teaching for over 22 years now
 
 
i can remember when i started there was
 
 goals 2000.
 
 
maybe some people in the room remember
 
 that maybe you don't
 
 
then there was no child left behind
 
 and then most recently there was common
 
 core
 
 
there's never a time in which it seems
 
 like a bad idea
 
 can't come about a bunch of garbage
 
 and nonsense that does anything 
but
 
 improves the education
 
 of our children as i sat here tonight
 
 
and i watch that slideshow
 
 
and i watch those desks sitting so far
 
 apart
 
 
i thought what kind of dystopian period
 
 of time
 
 have we entered into where we look at
 
 
this 
and we accept this as the
 
 quote-unquote what i hate
 
 to say the new normal 
it's not normal to
 
 
me
 
 
it's not acceptable to me 
i want you to
 
 
know
 
 
that if it were up to me solely i would
 
 defy the governor
 
 
i would send all of our children back to
 
 back to school
 
 
i would give them that opportunity 
i
 
 believe that
 
 his edicts are completely unrealistic in
 
 terms of delivering a sound education to
 
 our children
 
 
and i believe they are not well-based in
 
 terms of research and data
 
 
and so on so when we look at how many
 
 children have ended up with covid and
 
 
what's happened to them
 
 
there's no question that covet exists in
 
 my mind
 
 
i lost one friend to it 
i almost lost a
 
 second
 
 several who had it very badly who
 
 thought they might lose their lives
 
 
so there's no question that covet exists
 
 however
 
 when i look at the numbers and when i
 
 look at children getting covered
 
 what i see is that our response
 
 is disproportionate to what is going on
 
 and we are willing to just fall in line
 
 and listen to the leadership of this
 
 state
 
 this country and do these things 
and i
 
 know there are people who feel like me
 
 
and i know there are people who don't
 
 
feel like me a third of the survey
 
 respondents who have said
 
 
i'm not comfortable sending my child to
 
 school 
and i am all about
 
 parental choice if you do not feel
 
 comfortable sending your child to school
 
 
then i encourage you not to i 
encourage
 
 you to homeschool 
i encourage you to use
 
 the remote option
 
 if you're not comfortable with that
 
 
however i feel like i've been denied my
 
 choice which is to send my child to
 
 school 
i'm willing to tolerate that risk
 
 based upon what i know
 
 because i think that the damage being
 
 done to my child
 
 that still is in in school and the
 
 damage being done to other children 
is
 
 tremendous
 
 
i taught remotely for the last what
 
 three four months of school
 
 and when i tell you that i did as good
 
 of a job as anyone could do
 
 with live instruction every single
 
 day 
all right 
i worked very hard to do
 
 
what i did
 
 
and i watched kids slide into the great
 
 abyss
 
 and some of those children that i
 
 watched slide are supposed to go off the
 
 princeton this fall
 
 
are supposed to go to cornell are
 
 supposed to go to
 
 
you know you name the school and
 
 
and they're going columbia and 
so on 
 
 
but yet i've watched each one of them
 
 slip 
and i've watched a few
 
 hold on 
and i've watched the most needy
 
 students that i taught
 
 
completely slip we're not getting that
 
 back we are not and here we are
 
 and here's where we're going 
so i'll
 
 leave
 
 on this particular note 
sometimes it's
 
 real easy to just go along
 
 
and i feel terrible for people like you
 
 folks the administration here
 
 
it's simple 
and i'm in the same boat as
 
 
an educator
 
 
it's my job 
it's how i support my family
 
 and live my life
 
 and as a result of that i'm forced to
 
 comply because if i don't i'm out of a
 
 job
 
 but the solutions we've come up with
 
 
they're not good solutions
 
 
they're terrible solutions and they are
 
 solutions that are going to harm each
 
 and every one
 
 of our children and at some point i do
 
 
believe that people who feel the way
 
 that i feel are going to have to think
 
 long and hard about how we stand up and
 
 
demand
 
 what we want for our children that we
 
 think is best
 
 
i just want to say 
before i ask my last
 
 two questions that was well said bill
 
 
i 
i feel exactly the same we do 
so well
 
 said
 
 i just want to talk about the
 
 boces because we're also feeling some
 
 questions today about boces
 
 as i mentioned earlier in the meeting
 
 community meeting where there was only
 
 50 people in that meeting
 
 where there was only 50 people there
 
 was 50
 
 how many people 50 volunteers and 
then
 
 all of our staff
 
 as well go ahead you know having
 
 worked for boces for
 
 going into my 29th year you know over
 
 the decades
 
 things change school districts 
go to
 
 block schedule kings park 
did at one
 
 point
 
 school districts for financial
 
 purposes decided that
 
 you know we don't want to send two bus
 
 routes to boces we only want to have one
 
 route
 
 and as a result they basically said
 
 to our agency
 
 look whirly standing in the am this year
 
 
or will he sending seniors in the am and
 
 juniors in the pm
 
 
and they've changed things so that it
 
 accommodated him and our bosses always
 
 accommodated him
 
 and my concern with some of the
 
 questions with some of the students that
 
 are in cte classes
 
 
that are that are scheduled to go to
 
 carpentry and auto body and and
 
 
you know whatever other programs they
 
 signed up for
 
 is that transportation becomes an issue
 
 if we have an a day b
 
 day those particular subject areas
 
 you have to be there every day
 
 
you can't teach somebody how to sand the
 
 fender and paint it
 
 
remotely it's just not something that
 
 can happen 
so i suggested
 
 earlier that maybe we should call boces
 
 eastern south post and say look
 
 
we pay anywhere from 14 to 20 000
 
 tuition depending on
 
 the particular student if they have an
 
 iep or not or if they need additional
 
 services
 
 
we can only stand in the am because
 
 of the situation we're in
 
 
you know and get their feedback 
you know
 
 
i don't believe we
 
 
i don't think they want to lose the
 
 tuition i agree and and 
 
 
and you know i did appreciate that idea
 
 because i'm not
 
 i 
i know you're in western 
but it was
 
 
just
 
 you know shared with us the model that
 
 they were running 
and so we
 
 
traditionally we're share 
we're told
 
 what our schedule is 
but we are quite
 
 large and i agree with you
 
 
we pay an exorbitant amount of money
 
 into both season 
it's certainly worth
 
 
the conversation
 
 
the second thing we have in-house cte
 
 classes where we have cosmetology
 
 
and 
and you know using the same
 
 concept 
i mean
 
 if we have to get our kids there
 
 every single day the suggestion that
 
 
you know we've 
we've done in you know
 
 
boces
 
 is that we try to allocate you know 
 
 
the junior students first year 
students
 
 
the am session this way 
they could take
 
 that bus up every single day 
right
 
 and just have to get a ride home two two
 
 days out of the week
 
 
and then the pm students or the second
 
 year students would actually attend
 
 cosmetology and pm
 
 because many of them may have driver's
 
 license and license
 
 
it's just another suggestion to be
 
 able to accommodate that population of
 
 kids
 
 that really need to be there five days a
 
 week especially cosmetology students
 
 that have licensing
 
 and all that stuff which by the way our
 
 cosmetology teacher 
i mean 
she
 
 
she really just went above and beyond to
 
 ensure that the kids had the experience
 
 
they needed even if it was virtually 
so
 
 
i agree with you and i do appreciate 
 
 
that feedback
 
 and then just the last thing is more of
 
 
a more of a comment 
and it's frustrating
 
 
because i
 
 
i hear what bill saying i hear 
and if
 
 you don't mind
 
 i really do mr coggins 
i 
i don't
 
 want you to think or anybody to think
 
 that we just you know laid low because
 
 of our jobs
 
 
i think everybody knows i came from a
 
 district where we stood very
 
 tall against things that were coming
 
 down from the state education
 
 department 
i think when you're talking
 
 about health 
it's a little bit
 
 challenging
 
 
but i hope you understand 
and i hope
 
 everyone in the community knows
 
 that at no point did i think that i was
 
 doing this just because it was my job
 
 
but because i really do want what's best
 
 for children 
like i know all of us
 
 here 
but i stand just as equally
 
 frustrated when you're out and you see
 
 people out and about
 
 in playgrounds and beaches and and
 
 whatnot 
and we're held to you know very
 
 different standards
 
 
but when i tell you that we're working
 
 18 19 20 hours to make sure we're given
 
 the best
 
 
i know it's not what we all want 
but i
 
 do respect what you said 
and i really do
 
 
appreciate
 
 
that feedback my last thing is really
 
 more of a statement
 
 
and you know when i look at the
 
 guidelines for opening in new york and
 
 it seems like they print a new one every
 
 week because they change
 
 the rules so crazy 
you know you look
 
 at them if i can say that
 
 
you know john when you said it was
 
 cryptic 
it really is 
i mean
 
 
you need to 
you know you can interpret
 
 this 50 differently 
but they
 
 have a mandatory column and then
 
 recommendations for best practices which
 
 i don't understand
 
 
but it talks about ensure that social
 
 distancing six feet
 
 at least six feet or a physical
 
 barrier is maintained between
 
 individuals
 
 
while in school facilities on school
 
 grounds including cafeterias
 
 unless safety or care of activities 
such
 
 as moving equipment or elevating
 
 elevators traveling in common areas
 
 requires shorter distance of individuals
 
 
but then number two says if social
 
 distancing is not possible
 
 individuals must wear acceptable face
 
 governments that's exactly
 
 how we interpret what we talked about
 
 
earlier if we have to move kids back
 
 into a classroom
 
 the way i interpret this and maybe legal
 
 legal counsel give me
 
 
you know their opinion right is that if
 
 we had to move desks closer together
 
 to be able to not be able to you
 
 
know 
 
 
accommodate the social distancing by
 
 putting masks on the kids we would be
 
 able to do that
 
 
and that's exactly how we started out
 
 our planning if you remember we had
 
 
looked at 
i think it was the
 
 massachusetts model where
 
 we were looking to at least go no less
 
 than three feet 
and when we did that it
 
 was like everyone's high fiving each
 
 other everyone's coming back 
this is
 
 great
 
 
and i don't mean to put mr block on the
 
 spot 
but we did receive
 
 guidance from legal 
and it looked as
 
 though that masks were not going to be
 
 appropriate alone
 
 
but we read the regulations the same as
 
 you 
it was just as disappointing when we
 
 found out that was not to be
 
 mr o'keefe the other day you'd
 
 
mention that if we were able to go three
 
 feet we could accommodate every
 
 student every kid come back every
 
 student we had every
 
 building make up a class for three feet
 
 
and so we were able to
 
 say that if parents felt safe for their
 
 children to return
 
 that we were able to do that our hands
 
 are very tied
 
 in terms of that 
and you know again i
 
 
don't mean to put you on the spot 
mr
 
 
black 
but you may want to
 
 jump in 
then it was a few weeks ago
 
 where you know we thought that
 
 just mask face covering was going to be
 
 sufficient if you couldn't maintain the
 
 social distancing
 
 
but then the governor's office came
 
 out and clarified that and said that no
 
 you have to have that physical barrier
 
 
and so that then took away our 
what
 
 we thought was our ability to have face
 
 masks but the face coverings are okay in
 
 
the hallways and the bus
 
 
there's no 
it's not 
that's
 
 
nothing makes sense
 
 but that is that's 
that's what we're
 
 following
 
 
so aaron as we all know i should have
 
 
had a swivel
 
 chair john i'm just saying should i have
 
 a swivel chair as we all know
 
 
education is is
 
 not going to be pretty this year 
and
 
 we want to
 
 give our children as much as we can and
 
 
we've spent so many years
 
 working on this educating the whole
 
 child and worrying about social
 
 emotional
 
 
i'm the most emotional person 
shouldn't
 
 be talking about this 
but 
 
 
so a couple of things our most
 
 vulnerable social and emotional as we
 
 see
 
 
little children adapt much better 
you
 
 see a two-year-old in target with a mask
 
 on it's not a problem
 
 
my teenagers find the mask
 
 uncomfortable and 
and
 
 so hours 
six through 12
 
 in my opinion are our most mentally
 
 vulnerable
 
 
and i just feel like 
 
 because things are so different 
are they
 
 going to be able to
 
 
just go down to the guidance counselor
 
 
just go down to
 
 
you know or things like that 
 
 where they want to
 
 
just go take five minutes with the
 
 guidance counselor or even the school
 
 psychologist
 
 
is that still going to be fully in place
 
 
opened to everyone 
is there also i know
 
 
that 
 
 i know that over the the distance
 
 learning period
 
 last year that our sagem north 
 
 sel chairs they 
they did a tremendous
 
 job having
 
 a google meet also are are things
 
 for mental health in place 
and then my
 
 other question is
 
 
what does recess look like in in
 
 covid land in elementary
 
 
i think because i think i
 
 lightly brushed over that 
so i'm glad
 
 that you asked me about that because
 
 you know so last year was the big thing
 
 that we were taking away five minutes
 
 from lunch
 
 and recess and see there's always
 
 bigger fish to fry people
 
 
so with that
 
 
they're gonna be allowed to go outside
 
 
they're gonna be allowed to run it all
 
 off
 
 are they allowed to play on the play
 
 gyms are they allowed to
 
 play ball with one another or is it
 
 
you're going to stay there and just run
 
 in place 
and you're going to stay there
 
 and run in place 
and
 
 
i mean i think realistically they
 
 are children we're going to do our best
 
 to set up
 
 so that it's a safe environment 
but
 
 there's not going to be boredoms out
 
 
there if they are playing ball
 
 
i can't tell you that we 
will they're
 
 going to be as i said earlier rotating
 
 between
 
 the fields that we have the playground
 
 equipment that we have 
and then the
 
 basketball courts 
so we would obviously
 
 have equipment outside for that
 
 
we do have sanitizing stations that we
 
 will be utilizing for the students
 
 
but again you know as i said i think
 
 in the beginning
 
 
we do not want our students to come back
 
 
feeling like we're in jail
 
 and the first thing that we had on our
 
 slides was the social emotional
 
 well-being of our students 
and i'm very
 
 proud of the program that we have built
 
 here
 
 
and we are just looking for unique ways
 
 whether it be virtual more push in from
 
 
our sel chairs
 
 
you know all project kindness all of
 
 
those things we'll still have them this
 
 year 
they just may look a little bit
 
 different
 
 in terms of the mental health staff ms
 
 
graham and the office of student
 
 services
 
 now under the direction of mram better
 
 with ms graham
 
 we will be deploying guidance counselor
 
 
all of those different
 
 all of those services are still in place
 
 
but we see ourselves doing more
 
 proactive lessons as students come in
 
 and more push in into our classrooms
 
 so that students feel comfortable we
 
 know the issues that we're seeing
 
 out there 
again our sel chairs have sent
 
 out a survey to our students at the
 
 secondary level
 
 
and i agree with you at the elementary
 
 level we're going to be doing more
 
 proactive resiliency skill
 
 type of activities with them 
our health
 
 teachers
 
 for the past year have been building a
 
 health workbook for the elementary
 
 schools that are rooted in all the
 
 resiliency skills that we have been
 
 studying using the university of 
 
 pennsylvania 
so we're really excited
 
 about what we can deploy for our
 
 students
 
 
and you know it goes back to we 
are
 
 so worried about curriculum 
and we are
 
 
we are
 
 
we are going to work to ensure that all
 
 big ideas
 
 as much as we possibly can until this is
 
 all over is taught
 
 
but our first charge is just making sure
 
 that those kids feel happy and safe and
 
 healthy coming in
 
 and our staff as well our staff has not
 
 only been teaching from home
 
 prior to the summer 
but they also had
 
 their own issues that they may have been
 
 you know undergoing 
so that is our
 
 number one goal here
 
 
thank you 
no problem 
mr keith mr science
 
 
one of the
 
 important questions that was asked this
 
 morning was about safety and about how
 
 kids are wearing their masks on the bus
 
 
they're getting off the bus 
and now
 
 they're walking into the building with
 
 their masks on
 
 
maybe a hood on maybe a hat on and
 
 
they're not going to be as easily
 
 identifiable
 
 as they have in the past one of the
 
 suggestions was to wear
 
 lanyards with maybe id cards i'm just
 
 wondering what else 
if there's any other
 
 suggestions if there's
 
 
how are we gonna i mean obviously 
health
 
 and safety is
 
 number one concern that that is a that
 
 is a major concern of
 
 not being able to recognize kids and
 
 especially ninth graders who are now new
 
 to the building
 
 
so we don't know any of them to begin
 
 with and and sixth graders are now going
 
 in there
 
 
right 
so there's going to be a lot of
 
 unfamiliar faces and
 
 even more unfamiliar with me so not
 
 too unfamiliar only because we do have
 
 
our transition meetings for all fifth
 
 graders
 
 going into the sixth grade and then all
 
 eighth graders going into the ninth
 
 grade
 
 and we did those virtually over the past
 
 few months prior to the ending of school
 
 so all teams at the high school level in
 
 conjunction with their middle school and
 
 then middle school to elementary school
 
 
we met on every single student
 
 not just some 
but all 
so they were able
 
 to physically see a picture of the
 
 student talk about the student all of
 
 
those things 
so
 
 
so we're hoping right that there are
 
 similar some familiar faces coming in
 
 
but we had talked about this
 
 morning 
the use of the student badges we
 
 have never
 
 truly enforced the way that we need to
 
 now 
but we would have to ensure that the
 
 students
 
 are maintaining that and showing that
 
 because they will be wearing masks as
 
 they
 
 come in 
however we are also spacing
 
 things out so the kids aren't coming
 
 into school in mass quantities
 
 
so should in fact you know prior to all
 
 the badges coming out you need to slip
 
 down just so we can kind of recognize
 
 
you put back up and go back in
 
 
i think we would feel safe and
 
 comfortable in terms of that 
but we'll
 
 
be
 
 working with our staff working with
 
 security and seeing what other measures
 
 
that we can
 
 
you know put into place john 
i don't
 
 know if you wanted to add anything to
 
 that just to pick it back up
 
 if we're going to have the kids wear
 
 
their 
id cards just a matter of how fast
 
 can we get the idea that's the
 
 that's the only thing 
and that's why i
 
 say in the beginning we may just have to
 
 
do the old-fashioned
 
 put it down for a second 
so i can see
 
 
but you know our staff is pretty astute
 
 and
 
 granted the ninth graders we may not
 
 recognize them all 
but
 
 
we all 
you know we know our students
 
 here 
so 
 
 
that's obviously 
another concern would
 
 be now 
we have them wearing their 
id
 
 
cards
 
 
and of course we all know that 10 to 15
 
 of the kids are either going to lose
 
 them or forget them
 
 do we have a mechanism to reprint them
 
 in the building daily
 
 so that everybody has one 
 
 thank you 
so just for the community
 
 
we we are able to duplicate that 
 
 thank you thank you miss any other
 
 questions
 
 
we moved on i 
just wanted to make sure
 
 that we at least took a poll of where we
 
 stand as
 
 on remote learning 
did we want to take a
 
 poll and leave it at
 
 one full year of a commitment 
did we
 
 want to talk about a half year 
did we
 
 want to talk about a quarter
 
 
i think it's important that we do it now
 
 so that we don't wait until last second
 
 and
 
 
we're changing 
 
 
[Music]
 
 
i understand what rob was saying before
 
 about this 
i'm just curious why it
 
 wouldn't be sufficient
 
 if we just changed the language to where
 
 we could evaluate if it were possible
 
 and had people understand that it could
 
 potentially be that long
 
 
but we could of course if situations
 
 allow we can
 
 
we can we can shorten it and truncate
 
 the time period 
can i just ask a
 
 question to mr block 
i mean i 
just just
 
 
because i can foresee
 
 
i'm sorry jim just because i can foresee
 
 
something are we
 
 are we even legally allowed to tell
 
 somebody they're not allowed to come
 
 back
 
 
that's 
you know 
that's a 
that's an
 
 unanswered question you know 
and it's
 
 unprecedented 
 
 from a legal standpoint 
and you know i
 
 understand fully the operational
 
 issues from a legal standpoint you're
 
 going to want to see more flexibility
 
 because the concern is that
 
 family will say that being denied my
 
 right education
 
 
it responds back 
is no you're being
 
 educated being educated remotely
 
 
but that's not the same type of
 
 education as an in-person education
 
 
so from a legal standpoint i would
 
 recommend
 
 that there be some flexibility built in
 
 
i was actually going to
 
 state that if you were going to do that
 
 still keep the year
 
 but have a reevaluation the ability
 
 to be able to re-evaluate
 
 as ms heinz said that that's going to
 
 occur on a student-by-student basis
 
 anyway if there's a concern from a
 
 parent
 
 but parents are maybe being a little bit
 
 
 
 not almost misled but don't not
 
 aware of the fact that there may be a
 
 re-evaluation
 
 
but that's something you may want to
 
 
clarify 
and you could do it in an
 
 interval period you could do it
 
 
you know after the first quarter 
 
 
that's as a re-evaluation for example
 
 
i mean one of my concerns
 
 would be is that they realize what
 
 remote learning entails and they're 
 
 i 
this is not what i signed up for we're
 
 not going live 
we're not doing this or
 
 
not right 
and then we get an influx of
 
 kids and now class sizes grow and we
 
 don't have
 
 the space to have everybody in 
so i just
 
 i want to make sure that we have that
 
 flexibility 
i'm sorry jim
 
 
[Music]
 
 
my position is i like 
what bill
 
 just said my position was to get the
 
 true figures 
the way it went out was
 
 probably
 
 the right way to go 
so people aren't
 
 saying i can experiment for a while
 
 
and we never really get a true picture
 
 but at the same time i think if you put
 
 it if the language was softened up to
 
 
say
 
 
the possibility of a full year is real
 
 
however you know there's going to be
 
 independent cases that have changed
 
 etc etc 
so we all know that we all know
 
 that this could all change
 
 but to get the true figure up front
 
 
i think they have to be aware that this
 
 could be a full year
 
 of remote learning that's just my
 
 opinion
 
 
and i apologize i don't have the
 
 survey in front of me 
i don't i think i
 
 said
 
 could be 
but i don't recall 
but we could
 
 
certainly again
 
 put that out once we see the numbers and
 
 
if in fact we feel like maybe families
 
 felt 
a little bit it was too strong
 
 
and they're not really quite sure we can
 
 
we could send a call out 
we could send
 
 out
 
 an email as quick as you know now if we
 
 wanted to the reason why i asked that
 
 question is
 
 
is that we based that plan on every
 
 single student returning we did so
 
 the issue is not space
 
 
the issue is scheduling that's
 
 correct 
right 
so i view it as
 
 and and because of the six feet
 
 
you know obviously space because
 
 of that 
but the six feet parameters is
 
 
what allowed us to go to this plane
 
 to accommodate every kid they should be
 
 
so if we don't have all
 
 if if not all kids return 
then we will
 
 have more space obviously and then
 
 can bring back more kids so so the thing
 
 is like i said
 
 the issue is not the space matter you
 
 know the plan was
 
 devised based upon every single student
 
 returning
 
 
and that's why i suggested you know
 
 
maybe doing it 
once you know one
 
 or four times a year you know for
 
 
that reason i understand that it could
 
 be a
 
 nightmare scheduling 
well if the
 
 restrictions aren't lifted i guess
 
 
we have 13 kids in a seventh grade
 
 honest math class and we're looking at a
 
 schedule
 
 
you're going to look at the section 
say
 
 
all right put them in mrs smith's class
 
 or put them in
 
 correct 
so you know the issue is
 
 that you have this
 
 
you have the space it's just more of a
 
 scheduling thing 
and i would imagine
 
 that
 
 
if more and more kids come back from
 
 remote learning we could reassign
 
 teachers to
 
 classrooms and and that's the
 
 point so in a year where we're
 
 
already saying the curriculum's
 
 interrupted the day has been
 
 corrupted that's the only thing that we
 
 wanted to minimize in the beginning 
and
 
 get a true account because
 
 you don't want to be moving teachers
 
 around and upheaving schedules 
but we
 
 can of course
 
 always hand select 
and you know put
 
 students in as outliers who really do
 
 
need to come back 
but we didn't want to
 
 
forget i don't know who said it before
 
 
we just didn't want people thinking i'm
 
 going to try it out for a week 
and if i
 
 don't like it i'll go because we're just
 
 that would be really good
 
 
a quarter you know 
and that will give
 
 us enough time to do the planning
 
 and do the scheduling if we have if we
 
 had to i 
just think that the one year
 
 signing something this is one year
 
 scaring heck out of people based upon
 
 
the phone calls that i received today
 
 
so i guess we'll have to then decide 
are
 
 
we doing flexibility
 
 
the flexible option obviously is the
 
 best for everybody but do we want to say
 
 one year or do we want to say by quarter
 
 
and i guess we'll vote on that 
so
 
 if you want to do a full year write it
 
 with flexibility
 
 
you can vote on that full year
 
 flexibility 
 
 
so just put we'll put our hands up and
 
 
i'll just we'll count them all
 
 full year with flexibility or
 
 flexibility with
 
 re-evaluating every quarter
 
 
so 
 
 
but maybe we could put what would be the
 
 best way to
 
 
i think that what i suggested
 
 would be if you want to stay with the
 
 full year
 
 but that you re-evaluate on a quarterly
 
 basis because i just caution us to
 
 if we all of a sudden say flexibility
 
 
then people 
you know i 
just
 
 we have to have a true account school
 
 
starts in two and a half weeks 
and i i
 
 don't mean to be
 
 crafts about that 
but we we really do
 
 
and so i think mr black the way that you
 
 had said it
 
 
i think you know it's a year 
but we
 
 would be
 
 
reevaluating it throughout the year for
 
 
everybody 
i 
i 
i like what he said
 
 does that mean
 
 
i don't think that you're going to
 
 
make that full commitment 
i don't think
 
 you can quite frankly
 
 
so i think that the concern was
 
 being raised was that parents
 
 under the impression that you know 
 
 matter what i do it's a year now 
if i
 
 commit it's a full year
 
 
that's not going to be the case we're
 
 
going to look at it on a quarterly basis
 
 
again it's change 
there could be a week
 
 wake up tomorrow with an executive order
 
 which states that parents you know can
 
 make the choice on daily basis
 
 
you know 
so you know 
so i
 
 
i think that what it's going to be is
 
 that the district will look at it 
we're
 
 going to look at our operational needs
 
 
we're going to look at
 
 
the parental needs and make you know an
 
 informed decision
 
 but that the benchmark be on a quarterly
 
 basis
 
 
would it help if we provided some sample
 
 language 
and then you're able to
 
 let us know if that language looks
 
 appropriate
 
 because we can send that out you know as
 
 quick as you know sunday evening or
 
 monday morning for folks
 
 perfect thank you any other questions
 
 
all right we are back in the agenda
 
 
letter f approval of minutes
 
 
can i have a motion motion by mr 
mike
 
 caruso second 
and by
 
 meredith opie all in favor 
opposed
 
 abstentions motion is carried number two
 
 
we are in the visitors section public
 
 comment that pertains
 
 to the agenda i'm just going to need
 
 
those cards
 
 or 
if you're going to call them is fine
 
 too 
i'm going to call up the
 
 names we do have 
several i just wanted
 
 to
 
 make a reminder announcement that the
 
 visitor section the public comment is in
 
 fact a public comment it's not a
 
 question and answer type of period 
so i
 
 know that
 
 some of the cards that we are getting do
 
 have questions on them
 
 
i think possibly it's better you know to
 
 if if questions are asked we can have
 
 them written down and we can take your
 
 email and we can have a response sent to
 
 you by email if that's good
 
 or mr picarella if you want we can also
 
 include them in our forum
 
 on monday 
that's fine 
i just
 
 think it would possibly be best to email
 
 or
 
 you know speak with you separately
 
 regarding 
 
 
so the first gentleman mr caputo
 
 
i'm sorry capuano
 
 
 
 
my name is mike 
capuano 
my daughter
 
 is brooke capuano 
she goes to sagem
 
 
you have an excellent school here 
and
 
 you have an excellent school because you
 
 have
 
 the best teachers in the country 
i
 
 believe when you take the teachers away
 
 
you have a bunch of buildings here 
 
 to think that you're going to lock a
 
 child in a room with a bunch of
 
 books 
and if you could fast forward 10
 
 years that like a doctor or a lawyer is
 
 going to walk out of that room 
it's just
 
 not going to happen
 
 
now the main reason that we're all
 
 here
 
 is the six foot six foot six foot six
 
 foot that's all
 
 
we're here for 
why don't we tell
 
 everybody that that's a farce
 
 if you build the partitions around the
 
 desk the six foot is not necessary and i
 
 called osha 
and i called the governor's
 
 hotline
 
 if you build the glass petition 
the
 
 teachers are worried 
also i understand
 
 that
 
 
if you build a glass petition against
 
 the front
 
 the teachers could walk in the back and
 
 they would be behind the petition
 
 711 protects their cashiers and they all
 
 
come in when it's time for their shift
 
 
and they're back there
 
 
furthermore the children could walk in
 
 behind their petitions and take their
 
 masks off
 
 
the teachers could be up there with the
 
 blackboards and take their masks off
 
 and everything would be back to normal
 
 
this is all we're all here because we're
 
 refusing to build the petitions
 
 
you could take that desk 
there's schools
 
 that have taken that desk
 
 
and they divide it like this boom and
 
 boom 
and there's four children on that
 
 desk
 
 
and it's totally legal you can be when
 
 you put a mask on then
 
 or any kind of petition they said you
 
 could be nose to nose
 
 
i was just in a restaurant that was so
 
 packed the booth
 
 
the person right behind me 
i turned
 
 around 
i was looking right in his face
 
 
i called the hotline from there because
 
 
and they said as long as there's a
 
 petition
 
 
there was a petition in between the
 
 booths and the petition was only this
 
 tall i was looking in the guy's eyes
 
 and they said there's no regulations for
 
 
the height of the petition
 
 
so all we need is the petition and
 
 
all this is gone
 
 
second of all second solution why
 
 don't you just have the people that want
 
 to come into school
 
 and the teachers that want to come into
 
 school come in and the ones that want to
 
 stay home and the children that want to
 
 stay home stay home
 
 instead of forcing the ones that are
 
 horrified to come in to come in and the
 
 ones that are desperate to come back in
 
 
my daughter wants her teachers and she
 
 wants her school 
and she wants her
 
 friends
 
 
what if
 
 all the cops and firemen and what if the
 
 truck drivers that supply the
 
 supermarket didn't come in
 
 everybody who needed to came in
 
 to to help 
and they kept america going
 
 to mind odds that the schools are the
 
 only ones that let us down
 
 now as this gentleman said
 
 
these kids in five years if we could
 
 fast forward to the ones that are
 
 starting now they won't be able to read
 
 and write
 
 
i don't know how many people go to
 
 europe but our kids already can't read
 
 and write we are kids in college that
 
 can't add
 
 
this is the death knell of america this
 
 is not some small thing here 
that you're
 
 deciding
 
 and there's no reason these are
 
 
guidelines schools all around you hop
 
 
hog everything else
 
 open five days 
this is your decision to
 
 do in the generation
 
 right here remember that this is the
 
 beginning of the end of america
 
 
we hope that they rescind this
 
 but if they don't rescind this
 
 this few years here will be known as the
 
 covid dummies
 
 
they won't make it into college 
they
 
 won't do anything 
and there's no reason
 
 
and lastly i want to say if you
 
 open the schools
 
 
why bother the first kid or the first
 
 teacher that gets covered 
you're going
 
 to close all of sagem
 
 
so this is all the foss all this money
 
 
the reopening programs and everything
 
 
it's all a big fuss
 
 
it's it because this is being
 
 treated like the bubonic plague
 
 mr capuano 
i'm sorry there's a three
 
 minute time limit thank you
 
 
studies all around the world have opened
 
 
up there's not one case
 
 
the ymca tracked their own tracing 
40
 
 000 kids 
not one
 
 mr kevin thank you very much for coming
 
 
we appreciate it thank you so much for
 
 
listening 
and i wanna 
say lastly
 
 the governor said this is for us to talk
 
 not three minutes i listened to this
 
 young lady
 
 for three hours that was not the
 
 guidelines you're worried about
 
 guidelines guidelines
 
 
the governor said the people should be
 
 able to come in and talk
 
 
not listen to you guys tell me what to
 
 do with my child
 
 
thank you very much
 
 muchitash 
 
 
can i just start sure 
 
 
my name is lauren 
mukhitash 
 
 
i've been in station for 13 years now 
i
 
 have elementary age children
 
 
i'm going to jump the agenda
 
 
i'm sorry 
 
 
i'm going to jump the agenda a little
 
 bit and
 
 go to item 12. 
there's been a
 
 proposal
 
 to create a divor diversity task force
 
 in sacrum central school district 
i'm
 
 here to voice my support for the
 
 creation of that task force
 
 sachem student body 
is comprised of 25
 
 percent
 
 racial minority students our e and l
 
 students represent a staggering 98
 
 different languages spoken within this
 
 district of 13 000
 
 students our students represent a
 
 multitude of cultures religions and
 
 abilities
 
 representation matters
 
 our multifaceted student body deserves
 
 to see themselves reflected
 
 in their teachers and administrators in
 
 the books they have access to and read
 
 
and then the curriculum they are taught
 
 
so i would just
 
 plead with the board don't render
 
 this to
 
 a toothless subcommittee with no power
 
 
there are lots of things that i love
 
 about sagem
 
 
and i think that this is a step in the
 
 direction to improve upon
 
 what we already have a strong foundation
 
 for thank you
 
 
i'm sorry next 
is mr warren
 
 
my name is jason moore 
i'm a
 
 parent in the community 
 
 
sageman graduate i would like to make a
 
 plea to the board value and
 
 respect
 
 the school community by maintaining a
 
 high standard of transparency and
 
 communication
 
 at all times but particularly in times
 
 of crisis
 
 
the communication from the central
 
 office and 
the board has been
 
 unacceptable
 
 
it is essential for every member of the
 
 school community students teachers and
 
 families
 
 to be constantly updated at all times
 
 about every aspect of the reopening
 
 process the meeting
 
 
this meeting was not advertised to the
 
 school community at large
 
 
there were five parents outside barely
 
 and they left
 
 as soon as possible communicate
 
 
the following communicate the
 
 following to community immediately
 
 
how will we ensure that our remote
 
 students are receiving an equitable
 
 education
 
 
i can't accept that they will receive a
 
 subpar education
 
 
you've put in your email that i received
 
 while i was standing up front says it
 
 will not be the same i need it to be
 
 equitable 
i need my child to get an
 
 equitable education
 
 
they need to be live instruction and
 
 ongoing assessment we need to figure it
 
 out we need to put programmers in place
 
 
we need to figure it out 
it has to be
 
 
figured out we cannot make an exception
 
 
where part of our school community is
 
 receiving a subpar education 
it's not
 
 acceptable
 
 not acceptable to me 
should not be
 
 acceptable to you 
and it's not
 
 acceptable to your teaching staff 
i know
 
 
that for a fact
 
 secondly a building space plan must be
 
 made available to the teacher
 
 to the parents of this community with
 
 individual room measurements and the
 
 capacity to maintain
 
 authentic social distancing at all times
 
 and i need to know about the source of
 
 ventilation
 
 
i need to know what the school buildings
 
 look like if you're telling me 17 kids
 
 in a classroom
 
 
i need to know that there's room for 42
 
 square feet for every 17 one of those
 
 students
 
 
i need i need that in writing before i
 
 even think about sending my child back
 
 
i need clear opportunities for all
 
 parents to participate in this process
 
 
i shouldn't stumble upon this 
i should
 
 be knowing about this weeks in advance
 
 
i need specific criteria for testing and
 
 tracing in all school buildings
 
 
i need a contingency plan for what
 
 happens when the rate of transmission
 
 rises above three percent 
what do i do
 
 with my child
 
 
how do i make accommodations i need to
 
 know these things before we put our kids
 
 on those buses
 
 
it's unacceptable that you're asking me
 
 to put a remote survey in place by
 
 friday and 
your first parent meeting is
 
 on monday 
that's unacceptable
 
 
the parents need to know what's going on
 
 the school community needs to know
 
 
what's going on the teachers need to
 
 
know everybody needs to know
 
 
it's unacceptable 
i need you to
 
 
do a better job of communicating with
 
 
the school community
 
 most important details need to be
 
 related to about our children's
 
 education in the future
 
 address these issues immediately
 
 the students the teachers the families
 
 in this community
 
 deserve at least this much 
thank you
 
 thank you 
very much
 
 miss favaro 
campbell
 
 
i'm michelle for campbell 
i wanted to
 
 
just address the board about the
 
 diversity task force as all of you know
 
 
i started that email and requested that
 
 it be put on the agenda and that you all
 
 consider
 
 creating one 
it's been 10 years that i
 
 
my daughter started she's going to
 
 
be a senior now 
so 10 years ago i
 
 actually started talking
 
 to a lot of district office which is
 
 very changed now
 
 
maybe mr scavo might have been on the
 
 board of ed 
back then i don't remember
 
 
but
 
 most of you are not 
we're not then 
 
 
it's been 10 years since my family
 
 started talking about the
 
 having more diversity and representation
 
 within sachem 
and i'm really excited to
 
 
see it finally make an agenda
 
 
i want to also make it really clear that
 
 it's about race religion
 
 and abilities 
i want children in
 
 wheelchairs to see themselves in books
 
 in their classrooms 
i want children with
 
 autism to know
 
 that they are just as represented as
 
 every other kid
 
 in every princess book in every
 
 superhero story
 
 
and i want to help show our curriculum
 
 expand
 
 to teach children that kids with down
 
 syndrome 
can be teachers
 
 because there are stories of preschool
 
 teachers who have down syndrome and
 
 kids who are deaf and blind can grow up
 
 to graduate harvard law school and
 
 
become
 
 disability advocates and travel the
 
 entire world
 
 
and i right now we just don't show that
 
 we don't have the staff we don't have
 
 diversity in our staff 
we don't have
 
 diversity
 
 even in the books that they see when
 
 they walk into a classroom 
so
 
 i just wanted to thank you all for
 
 putting it on the agenda tonight
 
 and for entertaining the idea and 
to
 
 understand that it's actually
 
 bigger than one issue 
it's about every
 
 kid at sagem
 
 walking into their classroom walking
 
 through hallways
 
 
and right now where i know reopening and
 
 dealing with covid
 
 
but this has been 10 years actually a
 
 little bit more
 
 in the making and sacrum is going to go
 
 on
 
 long before my daughter who's going to
 
 be a senior and 
my son is going to be a
 
 freshman in high school
 
 
they're going to be gone 
and i don't
 
 want to leave that task force 
like i
 
 want this to
 
 
be 10 years from now 
every kid who's
 
 just coming into kindergarten or the upk
 
 program has a very different experience
 
 than what they had
 
 
and so that's really important to me
 
 that you all knew that so thank you
 
 
thank you miss sanders
 
 
everyone 
everyone maria
 
 
sanders
 
 
i am a parent i would like to
 
 
just make a statement in respect to
 
 
the reopening committee 
i 
i was a member
 
 of the reopening committee 
and i just
 
 would like to express my disappointment
 
 in
 
 the fact that the committee had no part
 
 in the actual planning
 
 or process of of the plan that was
 
 presented to the community
 
 
my understanding was that we would be
 
 part of that process
 
 
but instead we had two meetings where we
 
 were basically given
 
 the list of directives as administration
 
 
and and
 
 the board of vet had planned 
so
 
 
basically we got a sneak peek
 
 and the ability to ask a few questions
 
 though i certainly respect the time and
 
 effort and energy that administrators
 
 put in
 
 
and i will not take anything away from
 
 that you fail to utilize the very
 
 volunteers that you asked for
 
 because there was a tremendous amount of
 
 talent within that grouping
 
 
and we certainly could have helped you
 
 in putting together this plan
 
 for myself having students in second in
 
 middle school and high school
 
 
i recognize that this plan is not going
 
 to be adequate for them
 
 and again though i understand right now
 
 
we we're hoping that the testing
 
 standards
 
 are loosened 
the value of a full-time
 
 education will not be
 
 and these children cannot get a
 
 full-time education
 
 when they're in school fifty percent of
 
 the time they're only seeing a teacher
 
 fifty percent of the time 
and they're
 
 
they're sitting home in front of a
 
 computer
 
 for the other 50 that amounts to 10 days
 
 a month when normally they would be in
 
 school for five days
 
 a week 
so i just asked that in the
 
 future
 
 when you come to the community and you
 
 ask us to step up
 
 and come in and help you really utilize
 
 us
 
 because our voice really has not been
 
 heard
 
 
that's it 
thank you thank you
 
 
miss williamson
 
 nicole williamson 
 
 miss cologne
 
 everyone 
i'm josephine scalon 
i have
 
 a
 
 soon to be second and third grader 
and i
 
 just have a question because i'm still
 
 undecided about
 
 the virtual verse going to action school
 
 if you go to school 
and you start in the
 
 school 
do you have the option of then
 
 going virtual 
would that be an option
 
 
so i'm sorry 
go ahead 
i'm sorry 
so we're
 
 in this portion of the agenda we're not
 
 allowed to do back and forth and answer
 
 questions 
if you'd like we can have your
 
 question written down
 
 and leave your contact and we will
 
 answer any question that you have
 
 
i can promise thanks thank you very much
 
 
is it allison 
is it on the court
 
 
is her email on the card 
there's a phone
 
 number on the card do you want to put an
 
 email
 
 
perfect thank you so much
 
 
the next one was also several
 
 questions
 
 would you prefer to contact this person
 
 as well 
i mean
 
 
i mean he's been waiting 
so if he wants
 
 to ask him 
and then it's miss rep
 
 rapuno 
 
 
thank you 
that's all for the first
 
 section
 
 
we are on page two at the bottom
 
 number three
 
 business items consent agenda a through
 
 c
 
 
and i have a motion motion by
 
 
bill cogan second by
 
 laura slattery all in favor opposed
 
 abstentions
 
 motion is carried
 
 sorry bottom of page three personnel
 
 consent agenda 
a
 
 through l can i have a motion
 
 motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin
 
 all in favor opposed abstentions
 
 
this is kate bleedin
 
 
so this is an unusual way to welcome
 
 
many of our new staff as we 
 
 are having our first kind of live forum
 
 
most of the time we have folks here to
 
 welcome them in person
 
 
and some of you are virtual 
we would
 
 like to welcome all of our new staff
 
 that we vetted through really intense
 
 interview processes this
 
 summer with our administrative staffs in
 
 the building and staff members
 
 faculty involved in the whole
 
 process
 
 and that includes clerical custodial
 
 teachers teachers assistants and i think
 
 we have also gotten to 
 
 
the administrative section 
did i catch
 
 that correctly
 
 so we're through the l 
and i just
 
 want to welcome those folks that are
 
 in consent agendas so far thanks
 
 number five 
is support staff consent
 
 agenda a through j
 
 
can i have a motion motion by
 
 meredith second by jimmy
 
 and caruso all in favor 
opposed
 
 motion is carried
 
 christie 
did you want me to stop again
 
 
cause i think you have michael
 
 there 
 
 joining us today is michael emanuel
 
 
he is over here to my left
 
 the far right if you wanted to just
 
 stand and give yourself a wave
 
 
michael is joining us today
 
 as the network and systems administrator
 
 
he's been a integral part of our
 
 technology
 
 staff who have been working with jack
 
 renda in
 
 
it 
we're really excited about all the
 
 great things that we're going to
 
 continue to get the growth
 
 for our technology as we push through
 
 and
 
 put our smart schools investment
 
 through
 
 and and enhance the use of our
 
 technology for our students and our
 
 staff so welcome michael we are on the
 
 top of page 12 number six personnel
 
 administrators 
consent agenda 
a
 
 through g motion by mr scavo seconded by
 
 mr coggin all in favor
 
 opposed motion is carried
 
 
we'd like to take a moment to
 
 recognize two other folks in the 
 
 audience today
 
 joining us is dennis mcelherne if
 
 you want to give a wave
 
 
not quite sorry i'm trying to stay on
 
 top of it here
 
 
they're this close this close
 
 sorry guys a little more suspense
 
 
we're going to be towards the top of
 
 page 14 letter h
 
 probationary appointment of the
 
 administrative personnel there 
you go
 
 
andy
 
 
can i have a motion
 
 motion by mr coggins second by mr wadawa
 
 discussion
 
 
discussion 
 
 
i will be voting on this in the
 
 next two personnel
 
 items my reasons are the same as
 
 they've been for the
 
 past several board meetings concerning
 
 central administrative
 
 positions that is 
i believe the new
 
 superintendent should be part of the
 
 process
 
 in any administrative appointments 
 
 
what i must make perfectly
 
 clear is that these candidates as well
 
 as those from the prior meetings
 
 are qualified and capable of the
 
 positions to which they are being
 
 offered
 
 and i would fully support them if the
 
 new superintendent was
 
 part of the process 
so this is a process
 
 negative vote and nothing to do with the
 
 personnel
 
 
the new superintendent is close
 
 
i mean we're almost there 
and we
 
 certainly have qualified staff who could
 
 perform these functions
 
 for a short time as interims
 
 so that for that reason and that reason
 
 alone
 
 
i'm voting on the next three
 
 administrative positions
 
 
i must stress it has nothing to do with
 
 the individuals
 
 
i fully support them and would support
 
 them in the future 
mr kieran
 
 just because you asked for a discussion
 
 and for the public and
 
 
anybody at home by losing our
 
 superintendent 
our assistant
 
 superintendent
 
 and our special ed director we would
 
 have left three positions open where we
 
 would have needed interims
 
 and just for argument's sake 
mr o'keefe
 
 
what is the going rate
 
 for an interim at that level per day
 
 for which position are we speaking 
let's
 
 say it's the superintendent
 
 rates vary but a going rate for
 
 superintendent is probably
 
 12 to 1300 a day and then what about the
 
 assistant super
 
 an assistant superintendent depending
 
 upon which
 
 position it could be 800 to 1000 
a day
 
 and an executive director of special ed
 
 would also probably be in a similar
 
 range
 
 a minimum of 800 a day so what
 
 
and 
and i don't necessarily disagree
 
 with your argument but what
 
 
what we did was we took a vote to have
 
 
these positions filled
 
 
we had three people doing five people's
 
 jobs and it
 
 between losing that on a normal year is
 
 almost impossible but
 
 
losing it during covet is is impossible
 
 
 
 and we put things into motion to have
 
 
these positions filled by qualified
 
 people
 
 to save that money and 
this is money
 
 
that i mean we we already just talked
 
 about
 
 taking custodians off 
that we don't even
 
 know if buildings are going to get
 
 cleaned in time now we want to take more
 
 money out by
 
 filling these positions with indoors 
i
 
 think that that's a slippery slope if we
 
 go down that path
 
 
i appreciate what you're saying 
 
 
my my
 
 
my position is that
 
 a superintendent of schools is the
 
 single most important person in the
 
 district and totally accountable to us
 
 and the district for making decisions
 
 and to have a superintendent of schools
 
 not part of the process even though a
 
 new superintendent come in and doesn't
 
 know the personnel is certainly going to
 
 
ask the qualified people who who they
 
 are and do cement and be part of the
 
 interview process
 
 
i 
i think that's even more important
 
 than the
 
 saving of a few dollars here and there
 
 
but that's 
i mean i 
i see i'm alone in
 
 
that position 
but i stand by it
 
 
i 
i understand where you're coming from
 
 
i just if i don't appoint somebody until
 
 september 1
 
 
that's a long period of time at thirteen
 
 hundred dollars a day eight hundred
 
 dollars a day
 
 and while it seems like a few dollars
 
 here and there
 
 over a three month period that we
 
 haven't had people that
 
 it starts to add up and 
when we need
 
 money down the line i would be afraid
 
 that
 
 we put it on in a room is when we had
 
 
qualified people who could take these
 
 positions immediately
 
 
i will remind you of your fiscal
 
 prudence
 
 soon
 
 
[Laughter]
 
 alex just because we're having a
 
 discussion
 
 
so mr kiernan the people that were
 
 appointing tonight
 
 
i 
i have personally known all of them 
so
 
 
it's without hesitation
 
 that i think that they are the best fit
 
 for sachem 
i don't care who our
 
 superintendent is
 
 
i've trusted mr o'keefe as our interim
 
 superintendent
 
 to make the recommendations and i
 
 100 percent agree that any
 
 superintendent coming in
 
 will not find any better candidates than
 
 the ones we're putting forth tonight
 
 
opposed motion is carried
 
 dennis we're going to start with
 
 andrew larson
 
 
so andrew just want to welcome you to
 
 
the high school north principalship
 
 andy has been a teacher in our
 
 schools he's been
 
 in personnel 
he's been in
 
 
an elementary hiawatha principleship a
 
 sagamore principalship an
 
 ap and two of our high schools and
 
 
now he's joining the ranks of the leader
 
 
 
 ship in north 
and we'd like to welcome
 
 you and wish you all the best
 
 
we are on letter 
i probationary
 
 appointment of the executive director
 
 for special education
 
 
can i have a motion motion by mr
 
 scavo seconded by mr coggin
 
 all in favor 
opposed motion is carried
 
 
[Applause]
 
 
dennis mclehern he's 
he's welcome back
 
 to sacham
 
 
he has been in our school district
 
 working as a school psychologist
 
 an assistant to coordinator for
 
 special education he left for a short
 
 stint to go over to north bab
 
 as a director over there 
and we're
 
 really lucky to have him back
 
 and part of our team as the executive
 
 assist executive director for special
 
 education
 
 
welcome back
 
 
[Applause]
 
 and letter 
j is an approval of an saa
 
 agreement for the executive executive
 
 director for special education 
can i
 
 have a motion motion by ms
 
 slattery
 
 second 
if i miss volpe all in favor
 
 opposed
 
 motion is carried we are on the bottom
 
 of page
 
 14. contracts consent agenda a 
through t
 
 can i have a motion ocean by mr
 
 coggins second by mrs wadwa
 
 
all in favor 
opposed motion is carried
 
 
we are on the bottom of page
 
 20. 
it's an action itemist
 
 number a mandated new york state board
 
 
training for matthew bauman and robert
 
 scavo
 
 all in favor get kind of a motion motion
 
 by mrs volpe second by
 
 
mr man caruso all in favor opposed
 
 
motion is carried number b
 
 
it's an appointment of board committee
 
 members
 
 
can i have a motion motion by
 
 miss lottery second by mr scavo
 
 any questions all in favor
 
 opposed motion is carried
 
 
letter c is a board of education retreat
 
 
can i have a motion
 
 motion by ms wado a second by mr bauman
 
 all in favor
 
 
any questions sure i just want to make a
 
 quick comment
 
 especially since we're being fiscally
 
 prudent 
a retreat is not like gurneys or
 
 something it's where we all sit in a
 
 room and talk 
i just want to make sure
 
 that that's clear because
 
 we are not going on vacation though
 
 because my first year i was prepared for
 
 gurney's 
and then we sat in the same set
 
 library
 
 
thank you
 
 
we are on the top of page 22.
 
 
i'm sorry 
are we 
i apologize
 
 
can i all in favor opposed
 
 motion 
is carried
 
 
the top of page 22 donations consent
 
 agenda 
a through c
 
 can i have a motion motion by mr
 
 coggin second by miss ottawa
 
 
all in favor 
opposed motion is carried
 
 number 10 at the bottom of page 22
 
 committee on special education
 
 consent agenda a through b motion
 
 by miss volpe second by mr mancaruso 
all
 
 in favor
 
 opposed motion is carried
 
 number 11 monthly reports
 
 
so we there was a question from the
 
 community about when the committees
 
 would start meeting and how
 
 i think that maybe if people that were
 
 leading these committees
 
 
we want to maybe set some dates we could
 
 do something virtually
 
 
i'd like to see the budget committee
 
 start talking about if there was a
 
 possible mid-year cut
 
 and look into any and all options that
 
 
there was 
i don't know if there was
 
 anything else that
 
 you may want to look into 
but that's
 
 
just one that i thought of
 
 
i don't know about the legislative
 
 committee if mr kiernan 
has anything
 
 for the legislative committee 
 
 
all right number 12 we are back on
 
 public comment 
this
 
 portion of the public comment will be on
 
 any and all items that anybody wants to
 
 speak at 
that's not on the agenda
 
 and everyone will have three minutes to
 
 discuss and we said before
 
 this is not a q a and a back and forth
 
 
but we do want everyone to be able to be
 
 
heard that wants to be heard
 
 
the first one is miss young
 
 [Music]
 
 
 
 i press this 
 
 thank you for waiting for so long thank
 
 
you you guys have been outside the
 
 season board of education members and
 
 community
 
 
it's come to my attention that vp sarah
 
 waterworld wore a bill
 
 
 
 
we're a blm t-shirt at a board of
 
 education meeting
 
 
this is unacceptable i can respect a
 
 person's right to free speech and to
 
 have their opinion
 
 however blm is a political movement and
 
 it does not belong at our border bed
 
 meetings
 
 or in our schools and indoctrinations
 
 
the definition of a racist is paramount
 
 in the name of black lives matter
 
 the name indicates that black lives
 
 matter over the other races
 
 
this is unacceptable and this racism
 
 does not belong
 
 including the blm is putting itself over
 
 our law enforcement
 
 which many of our community are employed
 
 and of
 
 
all races this once again making blm
 
 a black organization 
furthermore new
 
 york attorney general
 
 attorney general james or the black
 
 lives matter foundation to see
 
 solicitations of new york donations
 
 
that has they have not registered as a
 
 charitable organization
 
 
we do not know whether the blm t-shirt
 
 that was worn
 
 was for the black lives foundation
 
 or movement in either case it has 
no
 
 
if any
 
 one of the board members wore my hat
 
 supporting
 
 trump 
i'm sure the same thing would
 
 happen
 
 
the apology that was put on facebook was
 
 cynical and scolding 
call us as
 
 all races and insisting blm is not 
is
 
 not a political issue
 
 
last i checked everyone in america 
had
 
 the same rights regardless of race sex
 
 color and sexual orientation
 
 as specific cases of discrimination are
 
 happening in our community
 
 
then we must address those issues 
what
 
 offended me
 
 is the use of rap music before sporting
 
 events glorifying women's segregation
 
 drug use and the cursing and the songs
 
 with the word
 
 and 
in it this is not acceptable
 
 if we are going to talk about
 
 discrimination it can it's got to be
 
 
used both
 
 ways 
so let's start by banning that bml
 
 
not political
 
 tell that to the murder black trump
 
 supporter bernal
 
 tramell furthermore the disgusting
 
 political use of blm as an attack on our
 
 police and blue lives is not acceptable
 
 our community of all sects and races is
 
 made up of law enforcement
 
 blm is declaring war against all blue
 
 lives matter
 
 miss young 
there's a three-minute time
 
 limit thank you thank you very much
 
 miss 
 
 
so conor thank you very much for waiting
 
 
i know that it's been a while
 
 
 
 i am beyond angry
 
 at what is going on with our children
 
 
we are not doing the right thing by
 
 
our children in any way shape or form
 
 at this point in time whether we want to
 
 send our children to school
 
 or keep them home
 
 
neither of those options
 
 currently are acceptable
 
 
i sent everybody board members in email
 
 
i got one reply
 
 challenged every one of your board
 
 members to go and spend 10 minutes in
 
 one of the
 
 one of the classrooms on the first floor
 
 in the second floor of one of the high
 
 schools 
did any of you do that
 
 
i didn't think so yet
 
 
you all think it's fine obviously
 
 that we have no ventilation in the
 
 classrooms
 
 for crying out loud we have to have
 
 special ventilation in the malls
 
 and other businesses 
but where our most
 
 vulnerable are
 
 
we don't
 
 
none of you would work
 
 in these classrooms
 
 in the current conditions none of you
 
 
so why would you think it's okay for our
 
 children to be in there
 
 even before this 
but definitely now
 
 now the air in those classrooms just
 
 stands there because there's no movement
 
 
there's no nothing
 
 and covert 
will stand in the air until
 
 it falls down on somebody
 
 
so you're putting our children in an
 
 environment
 
 
that is guaranteeing that if somebody
 
 has gold but it's going to get on all
 
 the rest of them
 
 
horrendous 
it's despicable
 
 
and now i'm hearing that remote learning
 
 is going to be a joke that's not 
 
 either
 
 
i don't want my child in one of
 
 
those rooms
 
 
i want my child safe
 
 
but my child is taking five ap classes
 
 next year
 
 which means he needs a robust distance
 
 learning program
 
 
but my understanding is we're not doing
 
 
that am i
 
 
incorrect
 
 
so what we're doing to our
 
 children
 
 
is despicable
 
 and you should all be ashamed of
 
 yourself
 
 just a second mr block just a second mr
 
 kyle 
i'll get your answer question 
right
 
 
now
 
 
i had a conversation with him
 
 
you know i know that you were asking the
 
 question about the being restricted
 
 in terms of the assembly
 
 
but it's pursuant to the governor's
 
 executive order one of the number of
 
 
executive orders
 
 202.45 
i looked 
i believe i looked at
 
 that one 
and that was talking about
 
 social media 
this is okay 
i'm just gonna
 
 back up 
just a little bit just so we can
 
 keep our space 
now it talks about
 
 non-essential
 
 gatherings and this is not essential
 
 
that's correct as long as while we're
 
 virtual because you still have the
 
 option of being virtual
 
 
the board decided to assemble 
 
 
so so you guys decided this was not
 
 essential 
so because you decided
 
 the governor that's not that they don't
 
 decide so who decides
 
 
there's based upon the governor's
 
 orders the governor said that this is an
 
 honest
 
 the governor said that we can conduct
 
 this meeting virtually or you can
 
 but so as long as you can
 
 conduct it virtually
 
 meeting is considered to be
 
 non-essential because you have the
 
 ability to be able to connect the
 
 virtual reality
 
 
thanks thank you for that
 
 
it's mr black 
so
 
 
202.45 it was extended by 202.53
 
 
and it's in effect until august 20th
 
 
 
 next fury
 
 
good evening i'm a proud sacrum
 
 educator and a parent of three daughters
 
 who attend
 
 
sageman schools 
i'm here tonight to
 
 
voice my concerns regarding the
 
 secondary reentry plan
 
 
i have a daughter in eighth grade 
and i
 
 also have 
a senior
 
 i have grave concerns regarding the lack
 
 of an equitable education for our
 
 secondary students
 
 
these children will suffer the
 
 ramifications of this decision
 
 in which they will only receive 50 of
 
 the curriculum
 
 for years to come in some instances
 
 this decision may change the course of
 
 their adult lives
 
 
i don't want that to happen to my
 
 children and i don't want it to happen
 
 to 
anyone else's
 
 i implore you to reconsider this plan
 
 and attempt to find a way
 
 to make the secondary re-entry plan more
 
 equitable
 
 so that our chm students can receive 100
 
 of the curriculum that they are entitled
 
 to just like 
our elementary students
 
 thank you
 
 
that's all
 
 23 board discussions 
the first one we
 
 put on today
 
 was an adoption of the 20 2021
 
 calendar
 
 
there was a talk of a change mr o'keefe
 
 
it's just you know something i want
 
 to bring to the board's attention
 
 because obviously
 
 administration has been meeting with
 
 district administrators
 
 as well as our teachers looking
 
 at the opening of school and just trying
 
 to be sure that we can be as prepared as
 
 possible for whatever that is
 
 
other districts have taken a look at
 
 this and also
 
 chosen that option each year 
a
 
 district is allowed
 
 up to four superintendents conference
 
 days 
our current calendar
 
 has 
three the first two are
 
 in september the september second and
 
 third days are superintendents
 
 conference days
 
 and the third one would be on
 
 election day november third
 
 
we've been discussing the possibility of
 
 having the board consider the ninth
 
 which is wednesday
 
 
i'm sorry eighth which would be the the
 
 first day of school for students
 
 to be a third superintendent's
 
 conference day
 
 in september that would give staff
 
 teachers administrators everything all
 
 the time that they need
 
 to be sure if there are those last
 
 minute tweaks changes to classroom
 
 setups
 
 changes to schedules 
assignments
 
 
whatever the case is
 
 
you know i had a lengthy conversation
 
 with mr barbara last night
 
 
you know his guidance counselors are
 
 ready to dive in to do whatever work
 
 needs to be done to make
 
 our secondary experience as good as
 
 possible but we need the data first
 
 
so once we have that data we can dive in
 
 on this we don't have much time and time
 
 is not on our side
 
 so for your consideration 
 
 
we'd like to talk about adding the
 
 eighth as a superintendent's conference
 
 day
 
 would we have to remove another day off
 
 
the calendar for that
 
 
we would just convert that date to a
 
 super 
i wouldn't alter the calendar
 
 right now
 
 other than that obviously since the year
 
 hasn't even begun
 
 
it still keeps us within legal limits
 
 it still leaves us the flexibility if we
 
 were to have a
 
 severe winter you know maybe with the
 
 new reality of
 
 our ability to switch between distance
 
 learning maybe 
that can even help us
 
 
you know in bad storms and things like
 
 that where we might be able to turn
 
 something like that on and
 
 not lose instructional time 
but i think
 
 giving the staff
 
 that extra time especially since we're
 
 down to the wire
 
 you know could be helpful now on the
 
 counter side
 
 
obviously families are already starting
 
 to make plans they're ready to send kids
 
 back on the 8th 
they've already made
 
 decisions
 
 
they've arranged child care whatever the
 
 case is so it isn't just as simple as
 
 
you deciding
 
 
let's re-adopt a calendar 
and maybe it's
 
 not even something you do tonight
 
 
maybe it's something you consider you
 
 think about
 
 
and maybe it's on the next agenda for
 
 
the 26th 
but i wanted to bring it to
 
 
your attention
 
 
to give you some time to think about it
 
 and talk about it 
 
 you know is it a possibility where we
 
 could consider that day
 
 for additional staff planning 
does
 
 anybody have a question about the
 
 calendar
 
 
i'm just thinking we're gonna make this
 
 decision we have to make it tonight 
so
 
 parents do have enough time to make
 
 arrangements mr bauman
 
 
can you what kind of professional
 
 development day would it look like what
 
 would it look like
 
 it would be a useful day for the
 
 teachers too 
it's not a none
 
 
i mean miss heinz can speak better to
 
 the professional development days none
 
 of them are going to be like the normal
 
 professional development days 
i'm sorry
 
 
i didn't mean professional development
 
 superintendent's day
 
 
would it be a day that the teachers
 
 would be able to kind of get their
 
 stuff together 
we so
 
 
i mean as we've been saying our teachers
 
 have been working hard all summer
 
 ongoing professional development this is
 
 really more honored space for them 
so
 
 they can continue to clean up get things
 
 ready make sure the google classrooms
 
 all their lessons are in place
 
 
so not our traditional 
you know ad camp
 
 style superintendents conference days
 
 
but we recognize that it's a tremendous
 
 amount of work to get started
 
 
does anybody have any other questions
 
 does anybody want to vote on it tonight
 
 or did you
 
 was the request made by the staff to
 
 have that extra data to get ready
 
 
it came through a conversation you know
 
 administration and staff have asked for
 
 
it
 
 
so i agree with sarah the earlier the
 
 better 
i would agree as well
 
 we can vote on it right now all right
 
 motion to change the calendar to the
 
 eighth being a staff development day
 
 second by miss volpe all in favor
 
 opposed the calendar is done 
get that
 
 information out to families as quickly
 
 as possible
 
 the next item up for discussion
 
 is future board letter writing this 
is
 
 something that i personally put on
 
 
i 
i don't think that
 
 we should be putting letters out to the
 
 community if
 
 with all of our names on it if we don't
 
 agree with what it says
 
 and i could be in the minority on
 
 
that 
but i'm i would be fine with
 
 writing a letter
 
 putting spaces underneath and letting
 
 those who agree
 
 
do it now 
most times it's a nine nothing
 
 
and there's no issues
 
 
but you know i personally didn't
 
 agree with the letter that got put out
 
 and 
if my name is going to be on it
 
 especially admonishing another board
 
 member i have to agree with it
 
 
and that's just the way i personally
 
 feel about it
 
 
i understand that we're a body 
and i get
 
 
that 
but
 
 at the end of the day it's our name and
 
 
we have to put our head on our pillows
 
 
and if we don't agree with something
 
 
i want everyone to have the freedom to
 
 
not only say that but be able to
 
 just to live with the decisions that are
 
 made and to be able to
 
 
stand up to the community and say here i
 
 did this or i did not do this and
 
 have a straight face when you say it 
i 
i
 
 
just i didn't agree 
and it's my fault
 
 for
 
 
you know ever putting my name on that
 
 piece of paper 
so i just i want to put
 
 it from here on
 
 out if anyone has an issue feel
 
 free 
but if whatever letter it is we
 
 write the letter
 
 our names are on the bottom 
and we can
 
 sign the letter if we agree with it if
 
 we don't
 
 
we take the space away 
and then you
 
 don't have to sign it if you don't want
 
 to
 
 but at least you can you can make your
 
 own decision 
and you don't have to feel
 
 
like you're beholden because
 
 maybe it's only five people who agree
 
 with it and five out of the nine agree
 
 and 
now all of a sudden it's a board
 
 decision
 
 and your name goes on it no matter 
what
 
 jim
 
 
so how do you determine
 
 whose name is going on 
suppose four
 
 people want the letter out is
 
 is that sufficient to send the letter
 
 with four names
 
 
that's 
that's why it's up for
 
 discussion 
so i did it 
so it's got to be
 
 a majority
 
 take to even have the letter go out 
so
 
 five members have to support it
 
 and then let's suppose it's a 5-4 the
 
 letter 
does go
 
 out board of education and the five
 
 members who agree with it 
sign it 
that's
 
 
i'm going to
 
 
see that if anybody had an issue with
 
 that i i just wanted to address it
 
 tonight so that
 
 we haven't had a chance to get all
 
 together in a room 
so so let me express
 
 you on the opposite end of the spectrum
 
 
if
 
 four people want to put a letter out and
 
 
it's a four or five board
 
 
the four people be able to put a letter
 
 out because the way that when you sign
 
 up for the board of education you sign
 
 up as a group
 
 and you vote as a group and
 
 listen there are things that
 
 happened in the past why i was on the
 
 no side of a vote where i got dragged to
 
 
the mud but
 
 
i signed up for that you know 
so my
 
 my impression is that
 
 five is a majority and 
and it's what
 
 moves resolutions 
and it's what
 
 moves you know 
you know 
 
 
different different incent you know
 
 initiatives and so on and so forth
 
 
so so i think the easy way to do that is
 
 that
 
 when you're getting attacked by a
 
 community member because of what
 
 the letter says
 
 your response is look the board the
 
 board majority voted on it 
i don't
 
 necessarily agree with it
 
 
you know if you have concerns 
 
 contact the rest of the board 
you know
 
 
and that's how we leave it
 
 
just just my just my personal opinion
 
 
this i happen to disagree only because
 
 
when we
 
 pass let's just say the new principle
 
 for sage of north
 
 in the in the minutes it will reflect
 
 that jim voted no
 
 
it's not going to vote that we voted
 
 
but if you go look in the
 
 in the back to it 
jim can say i 
i 
i said
 
 
no
 
 
and he could say anybody to the
 
 community 
and here's why i voted no
 
 and he could put his head on his polo
 
 
and he's fine like it will not reflect
 
 
that i said no
 
 
and 
and just i think it's wrong
 
 that you get dragged through the mud on
 
 stuff that you voted for 
and you
 
 can't even back it up because
 
 there is no record of you ever saying no
 
 unless you look through certain things
 
 on votes 
but if it's a letter
 
 
there's no record of anybody saying no
 
 
but if the letter's coming from the
 
 board of education
 
 is it coming from the board of education
 
 
is it coming from five board members
 
 
i mean 
i 
so i guess my point is i don't
 
 think we should be writing any letter
 
 
that's admonishing another member
 
 
i mean most most letters are in
 
 agreement to the state saying we need
 
 our funding to the state saying
 
 
we don't agree with certain things that
 
 they're doing 
but we should
 
 
certainly not be or
 
 
so 
and and maybe mr black 
you can
 
 answer this when we
 
 get elected to the board of education my
 
 voice
 
 means nothing more than anybody sitting
 
 out there my voice
 
 only means one as part of us nine
 
 
we 
i have no say i can't decide anything
 
 
i have no more decision making
 
 than my neighbor next door 
my my only
 
 input or influence comes as as
 
 a board of nine so the letters that we
 
 had done previously
 
 like supporting our seniors graduating
 
 in person
 
 or the denouncement of betty devos as
 
 the
 
 education or denouncing racism that was
 
 issued as a board not as me as an
 
 individual
 
 
so i think legally mr black if you could
 
 just give us some guidance here
 
 
that when the board of education of
 
 sagem school district
 
 issues a letter i think it has to come
 
 from the board
 
 if laura slattery who who lives in
 
 wisconsin
 
 wants to send a letter to governor cuomo
 
 
then i signed my name laura slattery
 
 
not laura slattery 
ch board of education
 
 trustee
 
 
and 
and that's 
i feel that me on this
 
 board
 
 
i'm not a republican democrat
 
 
independent anything
 
 
i am representing a community of 55 000
 
 registered voters
 
 my personal opinions or anything i feel
 
 
personally
 
 does not matter when i'm sitting here
 
 with the nine nine of us
 
 my only thing that i can do as a board
 
 trustee
 
 is in as a majority of this board unless
 
 legally you see something that's how i
 
 feel i was elected by the voters
 
 
i was elected by my sachim community 
i
 
 
i feel like i have to represent my sagem
 
 community as one of nine
 
 not as laura slattery individual and of
 
 course 
i don't think that's
 
 being suggested 
but we're a
 
 governing body and every
 
 governing body around the country
 
 
operates that way you operate as a body
 
 
you're elected to be part of this body
 
 
you make decisions as a as a body there
 
 
may be
 
 differences of opinion that's part of
 
 
our democracy 
that's what makes our
 
 country great
 
 
you'll be able to express those
 
 opinions at the end of the day you have
 
 to make a collective decision
 
 
and then you have to abide by the
 
 decision that that body makes
 
 one possible solution 
is that
 
 if you are going to issue a letter
 
 
and there's concerns
 
 
that dissenting
 
 members vote is not going to be known
 
 like it is when we take a public vote
 
 
you can take a public vote to send the
 
 letter
 
 
and then you can adopt that letter as a
 
 majority vote those who dissent are on
 
 as a matter of record 
they're on 
they're
 
 on record if that's the case
 
 
so so you're saying that no one member
 
 is allowed to remove their name from a
 
 letter
 
 
i would say that that's not typical
 
 practice that you would see
 
 but is it legal for a member to remove a
 
 name
 
 if the when your letter is going
 
 out
 
 
i don't think it typically sets forth
 
 all the names i don't know
 
 
i don't really like to say it has it
 
 printed all your names on the left side
 
 
it says
 
 there's a list of all the names and on
 
 
the bottom 
it's the president's name 
so
 
 on the left side of the letter
 
 
it has all of our names listed but
 
 
that's your 
that's your letterhead right
 
 
lists all your names 
it doesn't
 
 indicate whether or not you voted for
 
 that
 
 letter to go out or not it's you're
 
 
represented on that letterhead 
it's an
 
 official
 
 board of education stationery 
that's why
 
 your name is on there 
it's not signaling
 
 that you voted for that or not
 
 but the recognition is though that when
 
 you do take
 
 a vote or when the board puts out
 
 material
 
 that that's so 
so that's a fine that's a
 
 compromised
 
 decision 
i think that any and all
 
 letters should be discussed in public
 
 and voted in our public
 
 
that is a concern that you have that's
 
 one way of addressing it 
i 
i was
 
 
just going
 
 
i was just going to say that that sounds
 
 like an excellent idea and that really
 
 just goes back to 
you said about
 
 my vote you know is on record and your
 
 eight votes are on record
 
 for these fine individuals here so that
 
 would be the same thing
 
 
we discuss a letter 
you know we take a
 
 vote on it
 
 if it's a majority vote the letter
 
 will go but the dissenters
 
 are also in the minutes i like it
 
 
and i'm 100 in agreement with that this
 
 way
 
 
it's a public discussion anybody can
 
 look back 
but then we still
 
 are issuing a letter based on a majority
 
 of the board 
but as long as there's a
 
 record of who votes and who votes no
 
 
i'm correct
 
 
i am 100 fine with that
 
 just one statement and me and laura 
have
 
 gone round and round about this before
 
 
but i want to
 
 
i want to make this point look we're all
 
 elected members to this board
 
 as any elected official is if i want to
 
 write a letter
 
 
and i want to sign 
my letter bill cogan
 
 board trustee sachem
 
 
i'm 100 within my rights to do that
 
 
it's a matter of opinion as to whether
 
 
or not i should do that
 
 if i want to get together with four
 
 other board members and each one of us
 
 want to sign it as board trustees once
 
 
again we are within our rights
 
 to do that 
all right it may be perceived
 
 as a bad idea by this board
 
 
but there's nothing illegal about it
 
 
inside it's not a vote 
i don't
 
 think we're going to take here 
i 
just i
 
 just wanted to make sure that we
 
 discussed it and there was at least a
 
 public
 
 so that all future letter writing is
 
 done in public and just also just to add
 
 to it
 
 
it's been customary that at the bottom
 
 of the letter the signature block states
 
 the president's name
 
 on behalf of 
just signed the letter
 
 sincerely
 
 the sachin board of education and not
 
 place the president's name on the bottom
 
 of the letter
 
 the last item up for discussion
 
 is the diversity task force
 
 
so as you guys know i gave you guys all
 
 an outline about
 
 
what just got a little bit closer 
sorry
 
 
i gave you all the an outline
 
 probably in the end of july 
and i
 
 don't know if you all got a chance to
 
 look it over
 
 
i shared it with the board again 
 
 
the other day sarah 
so i would just like
 
 to
 
 make a motion to put it on to vote
 
 tonight on establishing this task force
 
 
i mean my my only issue is and i
 
 don't have a problem with this diversity
 
 task force 
but
 
 the way community committees are usually
 
 done is that
 
 we could vote to establish one give
 
 direction to administration to come back
 
 as to what the charge is going to be
 
 talk about the charge and then approve
 
 
it 
 
 
i 
i 
i would say that that's 
that's
 
 probably the route we should go
 
 and 
in the years that have been on the
 
 board we establish construction capital
 
 projects committees and
 
 
you know some are established for one
 
 specific job 
and then they
 
 they they disappear 
and that was for 
 
 
one of the 
 
 
you know construction projects that we
 
 did after 
that we didn't do any for a
 
 while 
so we didn't need that
 
 organization 
but
 
 i would say that we we either vote on it
 
 tonight we want to
 
 pursue something like this 
we understand
 
 
what the end game is what we're trying
 
 to achieve
 
 and then normally what happened is
 
 administration would put together a
 
 packet
 
 of a pamphlet that's made available to
 
 
the community
 
 
they could download it in a pdf format
 
 people would sign up for it
 
 submit in the same way they would for a
 
 budget advisory committee you know or so
 
 
or you know any other thing 
so i would
 
 just say that we we follow that format
 
 
you know 
and 
and you know we're not
 
 adopting
 
 
exactly what the world 
but we're
 
 
establishing a diversity task force
 
 and and charging administration to come
 
 back to us with what the charge is going
 
 
to be
 
 
i would have no problem with that
 
 any questions 
everyone
 
 all in favor of i'm sorry i read
 
 
the whole thing like
 
 lots of times 
i think it's great 
you
 
 know we need it here in saturn
 
 
all in favor all right 
any opposed
 
 mr picariello this still one visitor
 
 that we had called 
wasn't here at the
 
 time
 
 miss williamson
 
 
thank you miss williamson 
i'm sorry 
i
 
 know that it's late
 
 
i apologize i was doing yard work
 
 
and i was listening thank you 
and i had
 
 
to come
 
 
so i apologize this is my first time
 
 doing anything like this
 
 
so i really don't have anything written
 
 out
 
 or able to look up anything outside
 
 
so i'll tell you about myself 
i have
 
 
four children
 
 three at hiawatha two of them with
 
 severe nut allergies
 
 and one of them with
 
 viral induced asthma
 
 
i didn't i don't really know let me
 
 just go
 
 with this 
my kids are fine they will be
 
 homeschooled
 
 
and they will be homeschooled well what
 
 about
 
 all the other children that aren't as
 
 lucky as my kids
 
 
how come nobody is talking about them
 
 
how come what nobody's talking about the
 
 children getting hit
 
 at home 
how come nobody's talking about
 
 the children that aren't eating
 
 at home 
how come nobody's talking about
 
 the children that aren't learning or
 
 being sexually abused
 
 at home nobody cares about those kids
 
 
i hear a lot of things how we're
 
 emptying the rooms
 
 
and there's going to be nothing in there
 
 
no one's allowed to touch each other
 
 
no one's allowed near each other 
we're
 
 not
 
 
we're teaching our kids to be scared i
 
 was scared for a long
 
 time i've been hurt 
i've been scared of
 
 allergies and a nut killing my child
 
 fear 
cannot run us we need to stand up
 
 for who we are and what we believe in
 
 
and i believe all our children deserve a
 
 fair
 
 chance at life 
and we are not
 
 giving it to them
 
 
i think i think that's it
 
 
thank you very much 
i know that you
 
 waited a while 
thank you thank you
 
 letter c is board of ed discussion
 
 future
 
 agenda items future discussion items
 
 
excuse me
 
 
does anyone have anything future to talk
 
 about
 
 covered three tonight we
 
 
the next meeting
 
 
i don't know if that's the right date
 
 
that's today
 
 
the 26th is august 26th 
we're
 
 hoping to still be here
 
 at 7 30 
p.m 
can i have a motion to move
 
 into executive session
 
 
now we need a reason mr block
 
 
 
 we're discussing we're discussing
 
 property property 
i'm sorry
 
 
i just lost me first real estate
 
 transaction real estate transaction
 
 
can i have a motion motion by mr coggins
 
 
say goodbye mr bauman all in favor
 
 
meeting is good 
thank you very much
 
 
everyone good night be careful going
 
 home
 
 
 

Thank you very much. 
is [Music], read the congratulations, so,,, visitors!
, everyone rise for the pledge and then remain standing for a moment of silence with liberty and justice for all. 
Thank you [Music] good evening. 
Everyone, as you can see, the board of education is attempting to return to some form of public meeting, which is also compliant within the limits set forth by the governor's executive orders and the guidelines of the cdc and department of health. 
We must limit the number of people permitted to be physically present as a part of 
We compliance with those obligations. 
Perhaps the most important item for We meeting tonight is a public discussion about the reopening plan for september, as it pertains to the reopening plan for september. 
We hope to have answers to most of your questions as part of the presentation, but may also need time for the administration to research, an issue on occasion. 
You can always email the superintendent with the question as well. 
I am also aware that some attendees may wish to speak about matters related to conversations that occurred on social media and the role of the board of education. 
In that regard, if you wish to speak, be sure to fill out a card and give a card to the district clerk. 
There will be two opportunities for public to speak at our meeting tonight. 
The first is limited to comments relating to agenda items only. 
We will then move through the agenda after We complete the agenda items. 
A second opportunity for public comment about non-agenda items will be provided. 
I ask that all present be reminded to be respectful of one another. 
The administration and the board of education. 
Also the opportunity for public comment is just that public comment. 
the board of education will not engage in debate or back and forth with the public during the period of public comment in an attempt to provide all who wish to speak an opportunity to do so. 
Our policy limits comments to three minutes. 
There may be people who wish to speak, who have been left outside due to space limitations. 
ask security station at the doors for a card and people who wish to speak, who have been left outside due to space limitations will bring security station in to the district clerk again. 
While we respect the community and we always want to provide people with the opportunity to be heard if things devolve into personal insult or invective as the president, I will entertain a motion to adjourn the meeting. 
I thank you all in advance for your cooperation to start tonight's meeting. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe are going to make a presentation about Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe reentry plan. 
Sure miss florio. 
Could you fire up the cameras for Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe all right just give Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe a moment. 
While Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe wait for that and while Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe're doing that, I'd also like to apologize to those from watching from home, because, unfortunately, obviously from that distance you're not really going to be able to see Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe screen. 
So for that Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe're very sorry. 
You know, unfortunately, the limitations of how many people are in the room you know have 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe been able to move the room to an auditorium. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe certainly would have done that, but Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe're limited to a total of 50 people or 50 of a room's capacity. 
Whichever number is lower, so, unfortunately Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe're at that 50 capacity in the room this evening. 
This document, Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe're going to show tonight again is another evolving document. 
Back on the 31st, Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe placed the district's plan on the website, as required by state law. 
the district's plan on the website had to talk about three different models for return, which the district's plan on the website did since the district's plan on the website was posted on the website. 
You may have seen additional commentary from our governor where he has since changed some of the parameters, such as offering additional opportunities for choice for family and or for staff. 
So we need to take those things into consideration. 
So again, this document and the presentation you're going to see this evening is the most accurate as of now, but this evening by far is not completed at the conclusion of tonight's meeting in this presentation, you're going to get a copy of this presentation emailed to you through the school messenger system, the school messenger system'll also be up on social media and the school messenger system'll, be up on the website, you're, also going to receive an invitation to participate in a survey regarding choice. 
It's a follow-up to the survey that our sent out last week, where our asked potential preferences, this one's going to need to be more definitive where our actually need to know which families are looking to have which families children receive instruction at home versus those that are willing to send children to school. 
So without further ado, I'm going to ask miss heinz to start our off. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe. 
So this morning our actually concluded and had our last committee meeting, which culminated in the plan that our're going to be sharing with you tonight and, as mr o'keefe said, all of the community members will be receiving at eight o'clock a phone call to this manner and also the plan and the survey for remote learning. 
I just want to thank all of the folks that were on that committee with our. 
our are made up of several community members unit leaders, staff of all sorts, and it really has been a pleasure to work with everybody. 
Excuse me one second, while I got this on, so after a tremendous amount of feedback that our received from our survey from our community and given the lengthy documents that our have given out and the models over the past few months, I can happily say that our are able to offer a full return for our elementary students k-5, as well as a full return for our students with disabilities, our special class, which would be our 15-1 classes, our 12-1 classes and our 8-1 students, and at the secondary level due to size and the fact that, because our will need to reappropriate space at both levels, elementary and secondary, our will have to move forward with a hybrid model for grades six to twelve, and that will be an a b schedule based on alpha and household. 
The reason why our were able to offer a full return for our elementary school is because mr o'keefe and myself and our instructional directors and our director for facilities and the building principal began walk-throughs. 
Last week. 
our walked through each and every room in our buildings to space and measure at six feet. 
On the average our are able to fit about 17 students in a class. 
Now again, know that our have scheduled a full return with our total population, so with any remote instruction that would diminish the amount of students coming into our schools, so our would actually have even more room because of the re appropriation of space 
our needed about one extra section or one extra grade level k5 at each building generally, so our are going to be utilizing space in our libraries in our arts and our music rooms and other common areas, which our'll talk about a little bit later on remote learning is something that, as you know, Last week, it was confirmed that our will, as districts need to be offering this to our students as well. 
This will be a parent choice and a consent tonight at eight o'clock. 
Again, when you receive that plan, there will be a survey in there 
and we ask that only parents who are looking to remotely instruct only parents who are looking to remotely instruct their child child fill out the survey, and it is due. 
It is a fast turnaround by friday. 
We need to be able to staff and schedule the remaining students that We have coming into We schools, remote learning again, 
that is by a parent's choice with consent and at this time it is a decision for the entirety of the 2021 school year. 
I say this now because, based on the number of possible staff who may also look for accommodations, that might mean staff members staying home in conjunction with our students, our need to match up to see if our have enough staff members who are going to be able to offer remote instruction or should our have to look towards live streaming. 
If our do not have enough certificated staff that matches up with the number of students, and so therefore our would not have possibly a physical space for students to come back to. 
If that were the case, should, of course, all restrictions be lifted through the governor's office, then our would have to, and hopefully would have a little bit of time in between. 
our would just have to restructure and reschedule to ensure that all students are able to return remote instruction will entail. 
It is not like being in person school and it is not distance. 
Learning. 
Distance learning is only going to be offered. 
If, again, our are ordered by the governor's office to remain at home. 
All students and all staff remain at home, and that would be live instruction for two and a half hours on google me that would be k12. 
Remote learning is different. 
This is, more asynchronous learning with possible, live or streaming teaching happening throughout the day. 
This would also be a schedule that would look a tad different based again on the number of students and how we would need to support everybody, but we just did want to be. 
You know fully upfront and present about that. 
we also know that devices for we we are not a one-to-one school district. 
we have definitely made some strides and we are in the middle of major infrastructure work that is going on. 
we just did order about a thousand new chromebooks in order to be able to disperse for families that do not have any technology in families that do not have any technology in their home at all home at all, but it would be difficult for we to provide a device for every student in families that do not have any technology in their home at all home should families that do not have any technology in their home at all be on remote learning. 
So that would be something that the family would also have to consider. 
Students will be expected to complete all assignments daily and any students, obviously with disabilities on remote learning, would be provided all of Students accommodations as per iep. 
As for Students iep 
okay
, it's important, I'm sorry
, it's important to just also talk about the secondary hybrid model for six to twelve. 
On your a day, let's just say, you know, for the sake of just explaining it to everybody, it would be a combination on on a day. 
You would be in your child would run their traditional regular schedule. 
their would leave with homework and any work that would be on their google classroom for the next day that their are home, while the teacher is then teaching the other second half of the class on b. 
Obviously, our teachers are committed folks and our teachers would be checking in answering any questions within that 24-hour period, but we would expect that at the secondary level, again, kids will be making sure that all of kids assignments are completed and kids are, and kids are present. 
Attendance is important as we move forward in this school year.
, now that we shared with you a model of how we're looking to return we students, I think it's very important that all families and community members now we staff knows about the health and safety measures that we are putting in place, and we continue to look to put more in place as as time goes on, masks will be required for all staff and students, both in school and on the bus. 
Remember that the bus is an extension of school, any students are having any difficulty wearing a mask for medical reasons or because of a disability will need to submit documentation. 
As always, always would affirm this with always building principle or through the office of student services. 
Mass breaks will be provided because remember in our classrooms. 
our desks are six feet apart and in the regulations. 
Children do not have to wear a mask during instruction. 
our would encourage, of course, that masks be worn at all times, but that does give our the opportunity to give multiple mass breaks whenever a child does need it, while they're being instructed masks are to be worn, though, however, in the hallways cafeterias, if they're being instructed masks're not eating recess any other common area that our would just want to be safe,, our also every day. 
I'm, excuse me. 
bus travel will also include, as I said, before, social distancing practices optimally. 
our will be looking for six feet spacing and encouraging family members to sit together. 
Every day, parents and staff will be expected to fill out an online health screening survey and in this presentation, when you do receive an online health screening survey, you will see a hyperlink in there that you can see a sample of what it looks like ahead of time. 
our are also. 
our also took time to ensure that at arrival and dismissal, varied entrances in all of our buildings will be sanctioned off to separate grade levels. 
If they come off of the bus, our are also looking to take off the grade levels at increments of time off the bus. 
So everybody is not coming out at the same time so again, just looking to work ways to have plenty of flow while classmans may not look typical, especially at the younger levels. 
You may not see some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see. 
know that our classrooms will be warm and inviting like our classrooms always are, because our classrooms teachers will be there. 
their teachers principals will be there and our will still be able to decorate some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see. 
our will just not be able to decorate some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see with things that kids will be touching, because some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see would need to be sanitized every day. 
our classrooms will be devoid, as I said before, of any of those items that may collect germs. 
our are in the process right now, of setting up opportunities for our teachers to continue to clean out our teachers our teachers own personal items, and our are also moving out any unwanted furniture that our don't need in the room so that our can maximize the space hallways and other common spaces are being marked appropriately to ensure social, distancing, so markings on the floor items around on the walls and that's also shared later on in our presentation. 
So you will be able to see it at home as well. 
When you open up the link hand, sanitizer stations are located throughout each building, all along the hallways. 
our will also be having all along the hallways at the elementary level or any other area for gym cafeteria time when, at the secondary level, all along the hallways're able to go out so as children go in and out, all along the hallways can use a hand sanitizer as all along the hallways come into school. 
All of those. 
You know, welcoming areas would have a hand sanitizer station as well and at the elementary level. 
our would expect that the students, because our do have sinks in every room the students would be washing the students hands before and after snack and before and after lunch., so continued on. 
As I said earlier, our have reappropriated spaces at the elementary level and our are in the process of doing the same walkthroughs. 
Now in the secondary buildings. 
We know it's going to be very difficult, especially for the cafeterias to be utilized the way that the cafeterias typically are, because children cannot sit in those tables together. 
So moving in some desks, looking at classroom use all of those different types of things, but really at the elementary level. 
We will be using again if We're going on full return for all students. 
Right now in elementary school, We would be looking to utilize We music space, We art space, and so therefore, those special areas become pushing for our students. 
We have worked with those departments and We'll continue to work to make sure that those departments have everything that those departments need for those departments lessons and equipment. 
Cleaning of all buildings will occur daily in the evenings in each classroom. 
We will also provide hand, sanitizer, wipes, gloves and any sort of spray bottles and wipe offs for for We staff and or students who feel encouraged to clean in between applicable filters have also been changed in We classroom events. 
We will also look to open up We windows 
and We doors where We can. 
Obviously you know the reverse was safety making sure that your doors were always locked. 
Your windows were always closed. 
Now, We're being encouraged by the department of health to please use fresh air when possible. 
So We will look to do that prior to it becoming too chilly up. 
Isolation areas have been identified in our buildings, and so, if a child is a child has any sort of of symptoms or they come to school 
and they have not filled out the health screening. 
they would be placed there so that we can offer a temperature check and make sure that everything looks okay before we send they down to they classroom hygiene protocol visuals will exist in all buildings if they're not there. 
Already and again I share those with you at the end of we presentation so that you can see those. 
we will also be having routine hygiene drills much in the same of how we have regular school building drills at this time. 
Unfortunately, no visitors will be permitted in our schools. 
we just cannot provide enough secure measures for we staff and we students, and so again we will be limiting all visitors. 
Both traditional fire and hygiene. 
Drills will be conducted elementary snack and lunch will be in the classroom to minimize flow and secondary lunch. 
It may be in the cafeteria and alternately in the classrooms. 
we will also rotate any outdoor areas so for recess any of those other matters classes will be rotated on the game field, the basketball court, let's say, for example, and in our playgrounds students, are encouraged to bring our playgrounds students own water bottles. 
we do have bottle filling stations in all of our buildingswe . 
we water fountains, unfortunately, will have to be closed at this time.
, so just some additional elementary return details that we wanted to share with you. 
You know it's always tough to start with health and safety, because again we don't want it to sound, like we students are returning to jail, but we do want to make sure that we students and we staff feel safe for the return. 
But know that, on top of everything that we are doing, the social emotional well-being of we students is of the utmost importance to we, as well as of our staff, and we have surveyed students and we are looking to survey further the rest of our staff to just find out what are some of those underlying issues or concerns that people have. 
So we can ensure that we have we mental health staff there for supports. 
Unfortunately, we we will have to stress that students may not share materials. 
At this time, students will be assigned students own independent, math, workbooks and guided reading baggies will be provided weekly so that we have time to interchange students out clean students up and leave students for the weekend, so that there's a two to three day lag before the children pick up a new baggie and in those items we will integrate. 
As always in our literacy and our math, our science and social studies, topics whenever possible, this will be in addition to the strong direct instruction that our classroom teachers provide. 
Already all all students will be benchmarked for all all students ela and all all students math to identify all all students present learning levels. 
Curriculum will be retard as needed. 
We definitely know that this will need to occur for math, and We have provided some slides in the past that show you that We're fortunate 
We created We own math curriculum here 
a couple of years back 
and we know the the one to two units that each grade level will probably need to go back to so that, if I'm coming into second grade, I'm certainly not going to be able to start on my second grade. 
Math curriculum 
I'll need to be re-taught, some of the materials from when I was in first grade and for literacy. 
Once the teacher knows the collective levels of what they have in they room, they will be able to accommodate those literacy. 
Lessons around that art and music will be a push in again to minimize the flow, and we are currently working with we art, music departments. 
This is one that was a really tough hit. 
Music has to be 12 feet. 
Apart for any coral or any sort of wind instruments, we are working we hardest with the department of health. 
we are very fortunate here. 
we have a very strong music program and we do not want to see that diminish, 
and so we are looking for ways to think out of the box in order to be able to offer course opportunities that might be in smaller sections and different ways to offer lessons as well, but we have provided and are keeping all lesson areas in the elementary schools, so that students can still maintain lessons as needed. 
Physical education will be a mix of separating two classes. 
Typically, that are adjoined, so one class will be in the gym. 
One class will be outside and inclement weather 
One class will rotate between the gym and in the classroom., mr butel and miss mcentee have reworked mcentee curriculum to ensure that all team sports will be done in the spring, so all of those units will be taught in the spring and in the beginning it will be more personal. 
Fitness. 
Traditional grading will also return for our students. 
While we know that there may be some interruption in terms of what model we students may have to face, where we hear rumors that we may have to go to distance learning sometime later in the fall. 
we fully believe that by using google classroom no matter what we will be able to make that seamless transition to distance learning should we need- 
and we are well prepared, as opposed to when the crisis first happened, and most school districts were really just grasping at straws, 
but we also know that the accountability is something that is very important to we students very important to we community and especially to our students who are at the high school level. 
As I said before, google classroom will be utilized for communication at both the building principle and classroom teacher level. 
we really want to make sure that parents are on one medium so that parents can see any communication, email messages, lessons etc, and at this time we are going to enforce, to ensure for the safety of we staff and other students that any sort of instruction that is done on google classroom or virtually that our students adhere to our district code of conduct. 
When students this year sign on families sign on to look at schedules, families will be asked and prompted to sign off on certain measures around this. 
I just wanted to share with you some of our pictures that john 
and I took as our went around in our walkthroughs. 
These are some samples of our our elementary classrooms. 
Again, These're, not decorated, yet, of course, but you can see that These have removed a lot of the traditional. 
You know, wonderful items that These would see in a classroom, but again These really wanted to maximize space and ensure that the teacher had space in the front of where their smart boards are and then also making sure that kids had room and were not. 
You know pushed up too too much, so 
These still are adjusting that once every single classroom is created at the building level, These will be returning mr o'keefe and I, with These team, to just ensure that everybody has space both the teacher in the front of the room and then students around. 
So again, These are fortunate here. 
These do believe that These have enough staff to move forward and should the numbers for remote learning ensure even more flexibility. 
These may be able to open up more sections in These elementary schools and at These secondary levels, bringing back more secondary students. 
This is at one more of the elementary school and to the right there. 
You will see a classroom at the secondary level.. 
This particular sample is where These marked This particular sample the a and b desks, so that students will be sitting and then This particular sample will make This particular sample a little bit easier for cleaning at night for our custodial staff.. 
This is this is also a little bit of a tough share here, because I know that we've been getting a lot of questions about child care and upk. 
First, child care: we are still going to be providing am npm child care by boce by scope, educational services. 
npm child care by boce by scope, educational services continue to offer right now child care throughout the pandemic for our essential workers, and npm child care by boce by scope, educational services are happy to move forward to offer this services for all of our students. 
At this point, though, our are on hold for our upk program, and that is not because our don't have the space or our don't want to, but our simply have not received the allocations yet from the state, and that is how our are able to run our upk program. 
While our do have many students who do a tuition based into our upk program, it is simply not enough to substantiate our upk program. 
Should our not get the allocations, so our are advising parents at this time. 
I know I've. 
I've answered many phone calls many emails if you are need, if you need care, if you would like your child to go to an alternate preschool now is the time to seek that out just to be safe. 
However, if our were to find out about the allocations tomorrow, our would also be able to implement that. 
You know moving forward, so our have not changed anything our're not changing any spaces at this time, our're just kind of on a standstill but to be safe. 
our just encourage you to look just in case. 
Excuse me, ms hines, yes. 
Actually, since our last spoke earlier today, I spoke to mr duffy, mr's the executive director of scope and runs our upk program just trying to see if mr's heard anything further about our upk program and mr has not heard much more than our have. 
As a matter of fact, there was a meeting earlier in the day with the suffolk county, superintendents, as well as mr wix who's, the regional superintendent for eastern suffolk boces, to see eastern suffolk boces knew about upk funding and again their contacts in albany have been very, very quiet on upk funding. 
The only information their've received is, you know, floating a balloon from albany that their're considering opening upk up, but their may only fund a balloon at 80 percent of what the grant would be. 
So that would mean if the district wanted to move forward. 
That would be an expense that was not budgeted for and we'd have to make a determination. 
You know to take those monies from elsewhere to support our upk program, so it sounds like those monies're getting closer to a final decision, but I'd have to keep the border prize, so it might be a model in which we'd have to support 20 of our upk program to make our upk program move forward. 
So I'll keep you posted on that. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe,, and then on to 
now we boces cte program. 
So those are we students because we do have two. 
we have cte programs that we house we. 
cte programs that we house ourselves will still remain on the a b schedule, but the but the bose cte programs, where students get on the bus and go to boces. 
Boces did alert we last week that cte programs that we house ourselves will be providing that in house cte programs that we house ourselves do have the room so that will be live every day and for those students 
we will still have busing from we high schools to and from our upk program. 
we at this time, though, say that we may need family support in terms of if your child might need a ride to school if family support are going to our upk program in the afternoon or alternately. 
That is, that is not solidified. 
Mr o'keefe and mr savone are looking at that through transportation to see if we might be able to accommodate and pick up individual students at individual students homes. 
That would only be for those choosing remote learning right. 
Only those choosing remotely. 
Thank you,,. 
So here I just. 
I share the hyperlinks that you will see on on the presentation that that we've sent home for the sake of time, I'm not going to go through all of these links, but the top is a sample of we health screening form and the bottom of our all the protocol visuals a sample of these links that we have smattered around every single building and so for we next steps. 
As we said this morning, we finished we planning committee meeting where we laid out the the final steps here with we district leaders and we volunteers. 
we board of education, pres presentation is, is now as you can see, and then we also have a live community forum on monday at seven o'clock and we will be live streaming it. 
Similarly here, however, I would envision that we would be a little closer that so that you can see we a little bit more clear, but on friday we will be sending out a survey just asking community members for questions that community members have. 
we will collate those into subject areas and we will look to we best answer. 
Any questions that you have as well as we building administration will be delivering a common q, a sort of like fact sheet about further details pertaining to to the buildings, and this will include sample schedules for all of we 
students- orientations how those will go out for we grade six on we grade nine. 
Some of that will be virtual and some of that will still be activities just broken up into smaller increments at the building, as well as arrival and dismissal times and bell schedules for secondary students and then, lastly, as governor cuomo had ordered on friday, we are in the process of updating we district website for protocols for any symptomatic individuals testing. 
we are not responsible per se for testing we, but we are responsible for offering a plan. 
Should a student or a staff member go home, a student or a staff member are required to go, get testing where that could occur, and then, of course, a student or a staff member can't come back into school until testing results have been provided and then contact tracing as well.. 
So that is the end of we presentation this evening. 
we look forward to speaking and sharing some more and clarifying more for you, as the rest of the night goes on and then on monday, as well at seven o'clock. 
Did I my apologies. 
Let me go back. 
I 
I didn't realize that I think I got caught up in what we were saying about upk before, so my apologies. 
These are some additional details about our secondary return and again, with the utmost priority being the social and emotional well-being of our students. 
In grades. 
Six to eight we will be benchmarking for eli. 
we do that through a literacy management system that we have and also for math. 
All of we math departments have benchmarking type assessments that All of our math departments do in the beginning of the year and again this will be to identify present learning levels in grades, seven to 12 curriculum adjustments may be made for applicable areas where prior learning needs to be had so, for example, in our math and our science classes, there may need to be some learning from the prior year's regents bearing class, and so we would be looking to look at curriculum around that and possibly offer review classes for our students as well again, traditional grading will return. 
Students may not share, so we will be limiting textbook use 
and we'll be taking advantage of all of the online subscriptions that we have physical education again. 
Very much like elementary school will be a mix of the gym outside fields and other large area 
use instrumental lessons very similar to elementary. 
We are working with that department to ensure that lessons will occur. 
that department do need to be 12 feet if that department are wind and or choral in nature, and again We will be looking to figure out ways in order to still offer those choral groups, but in a modified version google classroom will continue to be utilized for communication with both the principal and the classroom teacher again for a seamless transition should We ever be ordered into distance learning. 
Lockers will mostly be used for am and pickup 
only that's not to say that if a student really needed to go back, We would not allow a student really needed to go back to, but again just trying to minimize the flow and minimize how much We students are putting into the lockers. 
So We would envision some form of outerwear
, that's appropriate for that time and modified or or very. 
You know slight binders and or folders notebooks that slight binders need stagger grades again in times of at the end of the period. 
We would be announcing grades so that grades can come out into the hallways, so that would mean that We would be at the end of the period starting it a little bit earlier, so that We can allow each grade level to disperse into the hallway to grades next period.
, sorry about that. 
So that still is the end of We presentation. 
We hope that this did clarify some further information for you. 
We are appreciative of the support and the time that the community offered We to be able to digest everything and wait for the orders, so We can bring this to you tonight. 
Thank you. 
Questions from the board questions from the board. 
Is anybody, jim, a john on the upk right now? 
The way that's funded is. 
Correct me. 
If I'm wrong, like a six hundred thousand dollar grant, primarily We get a six hundred thousand dollar grant. 
We hold a lottery that allots 252 families a spot in our upk program We have more interest than that annually, but families beyond the 253 are able to participate for the same rate, which is about twenty four hundred dollars per family for the year. 
So if, if the governor would give us 80 percent of that, that would mean that the district would have to come up with a hundred and twenty thousand dollars correct. 
But are you in that hundred twenty thousand dollars? 
Are we counting that that the lottery people are not paying tuition? 
That would still be the lottery people not paying right, so, in other words, the 120 000 could be reduced if the lottery people were willing to pay a tuition fee.
, that was a model the board chose to go with.
,, thank you just to figure back on what security was saying if they were to to to. 
Take twenty percent of that we'd be looking at about 479 thousand. 
Two hundred is what we'll be looking at, which is what accommodate 201 kids. 
You were saying that you were concerned that we, we might not be able to raise the funds to be able to. 
You know, manage our upk program and have enough you know what I mean. 
You'd have to redo the lottery. 
Then I I wouldn't I don't know. 
If would necessity, would you want to use the same number then cut the same number off?
, I set off at just 201 
and then and then open the same number up at 237.69 per per family per month. 
we could examine any model that the board wanted to take a look at. 
Certainly those other families had already been notified that those other families were among the families chosen for our upk program. 
That's the worst. 
The worst case scenario would be correct, but let's say those other families take all the funding and, and those other families don't and one of the concerns to have all the funding 
I mean have we thought about reaching out to some of we state elected officials, flanagan or doug smith, to find out if those other families can get we clarification from the governor's office as to whether or not the governor's going to fight, we can certainly continue to reach out. 
Quite honestly, during much of this crisis, much of those other families have been rather silent. 
we haven't been able to get a lot of information. 
the governor isn't sharing much with other people other than when the governor decides to put it out via press conference, I mean. 
Normally, our local representatives are very helpful in getting information for our local representatives. 
Unfortunately, hadn't been able to get information for our local representatives, but it's certainly worth trying. 
I mean our local representatives're two weeks before the start of school 
and you've got 252 families, not knowing whether or not 252 families have a pre-k. 
I mean I don't know, you know how the board feels, but 
I personally think that you would get 252 families, even if the board took all 599 000, because at 237 a month for half day pre-k, it's still a great great opportunity sure- 
and I can't and now more than ever and and would be willing to work with we if there was zero funding 
and we had enough participation to still run our upk program. 
would can we include something like that in the survey sits some of the families out there to see what the interests would be. 
our local representatives could do a separate survey. 
I wouldn't want to you know not on the same survey. 
put it out as a separate survey, specifically targeted to those families that are already in the process. 
I have a follow-up to that. 
Where are we putting all these students if we classes are maxed out at this time 
we still have not reappropriated our classes. 
we do have a couple of buildings because of additional special education sections that we needed, that we moved the classes, but we have not taken away those class spaces. 
Yet so, if we were to go with the will of the board to you know, put out a survey and go with a tuition base, we would be you know all set to go: hi. 
I just had a quick question about the bus and what is the busing going to look like I mean again
, it'll also depend on participation. 
You know we put out a survey to the parents a week or so ago. 
I think we had nine thousand respondents in in very brief order. 
in that survey about a third of the families considered, possibly keeping the families considered children home of the two-thirds willing to send their children in 65 of those said their children would use the bus. 
The other 35 said their children would drive their children children to school. 
So just some quick, math you're only looking at say, 4 500, kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers. 
I mean their children could change when their children put out the new survey, and it could be that you know parents first stop that their children don't want to use the bus and then during the year. 
Maybe their children start. 
You know their children need the bus. 
So their children're not reducing the number of bus runs. 
All the runs that have been budgeted for would be running, but with those numbers you'd end up literally with just about one child per seat. 
You know so 
and then you also take into account 
remote you'll get routed for 44 students. 
So in the worst case scenario there could be two pupils in each seat, but based on the information their children're receiving, I don't think there'll be that participation.
, just some clarification so with the custodial staff cleaning each night, so 
the custodial staff're going to have more to do than the custodial staff did prior. 
Have their children increased the custodial staff since the custodial staff job description will be different to do a more deeper cleaning every day daily versus. 
Unfortunately, that was one of the items that was pulled back on the budget, so obviously their children may need to take a look at that again their children were rating 10 custodians and then, when there was issues where their children even today, their children still don't know what their children state funding is and their children still have the potential of a looming. 
20 percent cut, their children decided. 
If you remember back to january and february, their children were talking about this. 
their children were adding one extra custodian, each building right. 
That was one of their children enhancements for this year's budget. 
their children did draw that back, so their children're going to work with the custodial staff. 
their children have work with the substitute staff their children have, and you know it as best as possible to optimize cleaning, and then with the secondary schools, where you have the a b desks next to each other. 
So that means, if I am an a student and I sit in only the a 
and then the next day, the b desk comes in. 
That image might change, though I was going to say that that was really more so that their children can show a visual to the families, how their children were spacing it out in the beginning, those desks we would see needing to be reappropriated and put into we we lunchrooms different other areas where we're going to need to reappropriate other space, the library different items like that. 
So I don't. 
I don't necessarily think we were just at north today and in the classrooms that we walked around in with miss trombetta. 
There was only about 15 to 16 desks in in each classroom: 
okay. 
That was an initial setup when we were trying to figure out what it would look like or how we could divide them up. 
But in fact, with the style of cafeteria tables, we have it. 
it really prohibits the number of children that can eat in the cafeteria. 
we believe we're going to take all the cafeteria tables out of those secondary cafeterias and store those secondary cafeterias and put in desks. 
I mean it's not going to be the most attractive. 
Lunchroom it'll be set up more like a testing room where children will be spaced six feet apart right with classroom desks correct, but we do anticipate that we would be able to offer breaks, for you know, students to be able to go outside and go into any of the recreation areas, 
items like that elimination and so then in the secondary schools. 
If the kids are changing classrooms will the b desk get wiped down between each change or how does that work in the cafeteria?,,, not in the classrooms that would that would technically be not possible. 
I mean there's 3 000 desks in high school and 1600 or so in in a middle school. 
That just wouldn't be the means in that four or five minutes of passing to wipe down those tables. 
But if we student would want to do we student own destiny, the materials will be in the classroom right. 
we are providing that for every classroom. 
and then one last question., everybody! 
It's okay! 
If a staff or a student happens to test positive, that would then be reported, and then the cdc would guide we on what we had to do or we have we own plan. 
How does that work? 
The department of health, the department of health department of health? 
So The department of health, the department of health department of health would tell we so if it's one student in one classroom 
right that may be different than a student in a middle school who passes through a hall or mrs clayton's, become an expert on the matter.
, so the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require us to make reports for certain things and the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require the medical treatment provider. 
The doctor who's performed the diagnosis for a positive result to report information to reporting for contact tracing. 
So therefore, we obligation we go above and beyond to make sure that, even if, for some reason, the medical treatment provider has not contacted the contact tracing, we will just check you know belt and suspenders that we have provided some insight in case 
there's an instance. 
The other thing is when the lab results come back. 
the lab results are supposed to be also provided to the contact tracing, at which point the department of health would be or enter cdc would be contacting tracers and determining who cdc would contact, including students or staff or family or whoever cdc came into contact with. 
Can I can I pick you back on that question quick?, thank you very much so on the checklist that we do daily. 
Let's just say rob 
and I are in a classroom 
and I find out that rob test positive for covid the next day when my parents are filling out the check sheet 
and it says, have you come in contact with anybody? 
That's tested positive? 
Will that prevent my entrance into each building? 
If you're saying you tested positive, if you're saying you're tested right?
, I mean, I'm, not gonna, tell you that rob testifies we're not allowed to tell you 
I mean I came to learn it. 
it becomes common knowledge of who it was, and now I have to honestly fill out the check sheet 
I mean I'm have to now have to say.
, I did come into contact with some of the department of health guidelines for close contact, and this is where it gets a little squirrelly because you know, are we in close contact? 
Are we in close contact? 
Their criteria for close contact is less than six feet for 15 minutes or more, so we'll have to look at each of those one at a time, and I can foresee the department of health as soon as schools open, you know, becoming overwhelmed with calls from districts all around the state just trying to get feedback and answers, so we're building criteria and protocols with we nursing staff with we personnel staff. 
You know, so we can make some of these decisions on we own. 
we have handled situations already, even during summer school programs. 
So it's not that we're unfamiliar with how to do it. 
we've had staff members with with covid, so it's just going to be on a bigger scale. 
Now, that's all, and also just to mention, mr block is with we this evening from ingram and smith. 
He has been we one of we main contacts that we've been triaging information between the state, the federal, what we have in we 
schools, what we can do and what we can't do and trying to find the best scenario for we students and we staff 
and we'll continue to do so, and I promise this is my last question. 
So if a parent chooses the remote learning,, a parent have to commit to that for the year. 
a parent can't change a parent mind like after the first marking period, 
a parent're committing to that 
and then a parent student cannot participate in, let's say spring sports,, so, I think in in the beginning of the guidance, it said that students may not be able to may not be able to enter into activities or sports. 
We know now that that is not the case and that if a child is remote, they're still a student of We, We're not really going to have any activities. 
So We don't foresee that being an issue. 
So it's really more for sports, but miss trombetta who sits on. 
The community. 
Four section has shared with us information in terms of how they're looking at that language and how us would not be prohibited most likely from keeping children back from sports in september, and then the child plays a spring sport and then come the spring. 
Sports are up and running and you tell the child Sports can't play, and just know that when us write that 
us're looking to make it more of a commitment that could be up to a year. 
That is because us don't want to give the misnomer that if a child says well, I want you know a family to say that a family want to be remote in a week 
and then a family change a family mind. 
a family want to do it another week. 
We will look at each case, but it would be very challenging for We to bring back large numbers of students who think who feel a family might have made a poor choice, because that would shift all of We classrooms and all of We teaching staff.
, I would totally agree with that. 
I just didn't know if it would be like after every marking period reevaluated, but if the parent does commit, I just don't want to hurt the student of course by saying. 
If extracurricular comes back in spring, the parent made this choice in september, and now you can't participate right 
and I think for We, you know being just of mine- that things could shift very easily. 
We could look to look at that come january 
and it may not need to be a year-long commitment, but We did want to write it down so that parents were aware all right. 
Thank you very much. 
Thank you for sharing this with We. 
I have two questions or concerns. 
When our own plan was developed to return to school k through five the ada b day, our own plan wasn't based on surveys that went out as to the number of parents that think parents would choose remote or not choose remote. 
our own plan was based on our entire population.
, so conceivably, if our have a, a 6 through 12 model of a day b day, hypothetically every parent said, I want my kids to return to school. 
every parent can. 
every parent can accommodate all of my kids in an ajb day. 
You mean physically back into school.
, every parent wouldn't be able to do that. 
How would every parent physically bring them all back? 
every parent don't have so at the elementary level, just very simple, math. 
every parent have to take out about five to six, seven kids out of each classroom in order to be able to accommodate that average size. 
My question a little bit on the six through twelve model--,, it that was based upon returning every single child to school. 
So if friday, the survey is if we have if we have more children now I understand you. 
Thank you. 
So if we have more children who are going to be on remote, we could conceivably- 
and I know we discussed this this morning in we committee- 
we could look to bring back more students. 
My question is that my concern is the same as laura is having a one-year commitment. 
I received a half a dozen phone calls today,, probably in the last couple hours about I'm concerned about the one-year commitment we know.
, that you know in remote learning it says remote instruction is not equivalent to in-person hybrid instruction right
, so it's not the same level right so for forcing kids out of school. 
What we're doing is we're creating a bigger educational gap for the following year.
, we're not forcing that would be a parent's choice, but the thing is we allow a parent to come back after each quarter.
, if we're able to accommodate a parent according to the way our own plan was designed. 
Why wouldn't we allow a parent come back after after one quarter, so a parent can get that? 
I didn't think we said that we wouldn't be allowing we said that it would be really prohibitive for we to be able to reschedule a parent back into classrooms, but we could look at it based on the numbers that we have. 
we wanted to be honest, mr scavo, and let families know that this could be a year-long commitment, and most districts are looking at that at either january or the year long, because it is very disruptive that would mean having to up just move around the entire schedule for. 
You know our schools, which our may still have to do, should covert restrictions be lifted, but you wouldn't want to recant, and our know that that happened quite a bit where, in the beginning of all this debacle, our were putting out information 
and then something you know, alternatively, was shared, but I think our just said before with miss slattery, that, of course, if our could look at it by quarter and our felt like it wasn't going to be a tremendous feat for our families that our would do that. 
But I think that that's not probably what a parent is going to make a parent choice on if I'm choosing to be remote. 
It's because I'm thinking that it's unsafe for my child to be at school. 
So I'm hoping that by these presentation, slides that we have 
people will see that we've made tremendous tremendous. 
You know strides in making sure that our schools are safe, our schools're, clean 
and we're doing routine protocols to ensure that, but the one-year commitment we know is a year. 
That's what this time for right! 
Now!
, so if something changes at home a person, that's furloughed now has to go back to work right, something changes at home a person, 
that's furloughed want to and something changes at home a person, that's furloughed something changes at home a person, that's furloughed impression is going to be that something changes at home a person, that's furloughed 
can't return because something changes at home a person, that's furloughed signed the paper saying that something changes at home a person, that's furloughed have a one-year commitment to be at. 
But I mean I think, though if, if there's something along those lines- 
and we all get those calls all the time, if there's a family, that really is in enough need and feels like something changes at home a person, that's furloughed made the poor choice or not a poor choice. 
something changes at home a person, 
that's furloughed made the wrong choice for what something changes at home a person, that's furloughed something changes at home a person, that's furloughed thing is. 
Going on right now, so whether a parent goes back, furloughed or something changes at home a person, that's furloughed child is just not doing well in remote learning and something changes at home 
a person, that's furloughed were to contact us just like any other parent phone call that us would have. 
Of course, us would look at every case individually, but I'm talking as a whole. 
us could not say you're going to be a remote 
and then, if you choose to decide in masses that you want to come back, us just would not be able to run the same schedule 
and then us would be restarting everything over again. 
The reason why I bring this up is: I watched the the newsday webinar yesterday us had dr johnson. 
I finally heard all about johnson. 
I got a chance to see johnson in the presentation, along with a psychiatrist along with a the superintendent of north babylon, and that exact question came up right and a lot of the experts were saying. 
I would not go past a semester. 
In fact, a lot of districts are going quarterly, you know- 
and I just don't. 
I just don't want to influence a person's decision because a lot of districts're fearful that, if a lot of districts sign the paper a lot of districts're not going to be able to come back because the reality of the paper is, is that you know when we look at the education of even a day b day. 
My concern is that, as a teacher, you can't teach the entire curriculum and now we're talking about prior learning being re-taught from the previous year, how you and you're never going to be able to teach the the entire curriculum, but the kids that at home that are not getting the same. 
Equivalency of education are going to be further behind the following year and which all we're going to do is create a a snowball effect and that's My concern. 
I mean you know I personally would like you know the opportunity that, if they, if they come back after, if they're the first quarter, which is a 10-week period or nine-week period, I think it would be a little more settling for the people in The community. 
Knowing that all right, this remote's not learning I committed to a year now, I'm stuck well
, I mean, I think I think two things right, because I agree with you. 
I don't think anybody wants to be in the position where we can't welcome back students interchangeably as students need, and we definitely know that, no matter what happens. 
Curriculum is going to be interrupted this year. 
That is a safe bet, but if we play, if it's the will of the board, if it's the will of the board to change that- 
and you would like to make that language more flexible, we're happy to do that. 
But know that we've taken, you know quite a concealed amount of time to making sure we would prefer we students not to be on remote, but if a family really chooses and needs to choose that we honor and we respect that absolutely. 
But, I mean nobody wants to do that, but nobody's the size of sagem either, and so we have different restrictions. 
That's why the question was the plan design based on the entire the question was. 
the plan design based on the entire it was was based on of if all students were going to be a full return, then we would have to go in an a b day if we are finding, though, that we have remote students at a quantity where we can bring back students even an additional day or or by grade level seniors. 
First, ninth graders. 
First, you know. 
However, we look to plan through that. 
Then that's would be we next step. 
So just what we were saying earlier in we remote instruction, it's going to be hard to match up what exactly the model will look like until we have the survey results from our teachers and for we families, so we can match it up certification-wise. 
My biggest concern is we have kids taking ap exams and getting those kids ready for that and getting those kids ready for the next level college. 
You know we. 
we have training as much face time with with staff. 
It's absolutely. 
I agree with you 
and I'm very 
I'm very thankful. 
You know working with the scta if we ever have to think about distance learning the fact that we'll be providing two and a half hours every day for we students so running the same schedule, just shortened periods. 
You know working on google classroom interchangeably now and consistently across all of our classrooms. 
You know just right now. 
Currently we have a tremendous amount of teachers that are undergoing pd, virtually to ensure that everything is is up and running and that teachers that are undergoing pd feel clarified and supported in that kind of work, but you're preaching to the choir. 
I couldn't agree with you more that this is a really challenging time. 
I have a high schooler myself 
and she's in a smaller district, doing an a b schedule. 
So I scratch my head a lot right now, so I I completely respect and understand and if the board would like us to look at the year-long date, just let us know and us'd be happy to accommodate.
, this this will go the, remote learning actually just went out. 
That survey just went out, but us 
can I mean I could send That survey on on. 
On remind in five minutes, if us wanted to say you know that us've changed the date, but it sounds like. 
Maybe that needs to be more of a discussion if us're looking to go that route meredith engine and then jimmy so on the remote learning. 
If a parent were to choose that model, I understand that us would want a parent were to choose that model to commit for the full year, because us are devoting staff just to that remote learning us're not using a teacher who may be inside the classroom, sometimes us're going to utilize the staff that, for whatever reason, has to be staying at home to be our remote teachers. 
That's the optimal plan, so at the elementary level, it works a little bit easier in that in that fashion. 
If I'm an elementary teacher and I'm out, I can conceivably teach any of those grade levels 
if I'm a librarian, obviously that certification, et cetera et cetera, it gets a little trickier at the secondary level, because if I'm a chemistry, teacher 
and 
and I'm out- 
and maybe I don't have as many students out for chemistry- 
you know- 
then what am I giving to that teacher in terms of work that as many students would be doing for that day. 
So one could say that that teacher would switch what as many students're doing and now as many students're going to teach more science electives and as many students can support any of those students who are out needing science electives. 
So it's really going to boil down to looking at the hard numbers of students matched up with the teachers that we have. 
Should we not be able to match everybody up which 
I'm hopeful we will be able to, then we would need to start entering into some sort of live streaming or larger groups of google classrooms, where a teacher, instead of having a class of maybe 25 or 26 in a google classroom, we may have to have larger numbers, and 
so then that's why the year-long decision, or not doing it every quarter becomes very challenging for we. 
If I'm a teacher 
and I'm running a google classroom of 45 kids and 
now some that those classrooms want to go back, a google classroom of 45 kids are a google classroom of 45 kids going into? 
Where am I fitting a google classroom of 45 kids into 
so then you're having to change people's schedule? 
It's a lot of moving parts, it is and then, if, so we have 
so children are able to through children parents, choose whether children want to come back to school or not. 
Our teachers are not electing whether Our teachers're coming back to school. 
The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning are the teachers that have reasons why The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning cannot return, and so, even if tomorrow, you know three weeks after school started, all of our remote learners said well. 
This is for the birds. 
I don't like This. 
I want to go back to school. 
We wouldn't then have the ability to bring them back, because, even though We did the classrooms for them, We wouldn't at that point, have the ability. 
Would We not at this time, because again, with six feet, We are, you know down to the amount of numbers that We have, 
but if, if We numbers look as such, where the remote learning is a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms, let's say, for example, instead of them being 17, that might only be 13 or 14. 
So then We could start welcoming them back, but that would be based on almost you know, looking at each student individually and being able to see how We can schedule them back into school, which is probably a very physical impossibility in the next three weeks. 
It's a little hard with our secondary schools as a as a secondary mom. 
It is it it kind of does stink 
and there's no two ways about it: our children, no child, is going to get the best education this year. 
It's just not going to happen and something We're going to try 
We best 
We'll. 
Definitely try We best right. 
If one, let's say somerset had an influx of you know. 
80 percent of their kids wanted to stay home and remote learn that would open up a lot more room, but it wouldn't necessarily mean that We would do somerset where we would do children win every single day and 
the rest of we would do.
, We would be making decisions that are consistent for all students, but then We might be reappropriating staff to help out in other ways in other areas, and I don't want to put you on the spot, but it's okay. 
That's why We're here 
We're on the spot? 
Have We looked into sixth grade at all, because in my opinion sixth grade is that lost grade? 
It's a grade where they're a little too young to still stay home by they and not only just stay home for the day by they, but also teach they kind of you know get on this get on the schedule 
get on the computer. 
Do what you got to do? 
Keep yourself moving on that b day. 
Have We visited something that once We get all We numbers, because I know We can't really finalize anything until We get all these surveys and numbers, but once We get all those numbers, are We going to be able to maybe look at sixth grade going every day as a possibility?
, that's absolutely you know
, that's definitely a conversation that we've been having as as soon as we know what the numbers are. 
Will we be able to welcome back additional grades, and I would I would assume that we would be having these conversations with with all of you, we administrative team, obviously as well and sixth grade is one of those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off at, because we know that those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off could be 10 11 years old going into school, and I would not feel comfortable myself at times, leaving my child home for long periods,, and so, we've had those conversations and once we know the numbers we'll be able to come back and report if we're able to make any changes good. 
Thank you. 
So much, no problem, just a quick question. 
Some clarification!, piggybacking a little bit on what mr scavo said. 
Are we entering the year making an assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver 100 of content in regards to secondary curriculum? 
If that is the assumption that I think you said that we're almost entering into, I mean who's going to choose what topics and what's being covered. 
Are we letting different teachers different people it just it concerns me that we're entering, 
I know, there's no perfect answer and there's no scenario that can right that, under these circumstances that you've, given you 
but. 
I guess that makes more of mr scala's point is that if we're making the assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver content, we should be trying to wait till so many surveys come back and see how many kids we can actually get 
and. 
So right, I don't have a perfect answer for it, but I can tell you what we're doing to set up for that. 
I had a chair meeting a couple of weeks ago, so we instructional leaders in each department to talk about that, especially at the secondary level, and so we would be looking at we curriculum at what are the big ideas at the end of the school year. 
What is it that the students are expected to learn so the students can. 
You know move forward and pass those classes and or regence exams, we're also hoping to have a little bit more guidance in terms of the state education department in terms of what they're going to do in relaxing standards and curriculum and testing so much in how they had canceled the regents. 
we don't hope for that. 
we hope more for choice so that these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents. 
If these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents want to take it and see what kind of grade these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents get, 
I don't, I don't think we're looking. 
I don't think- 
and I know 
you mean it this way, but we're not assuming we're not going to be able to get through our curriculum, but we want to be real with we families. 
our curriculum could look a little bit different than what our curriculum normally does, and I know our teachers again hard workers are already looking at that. 
we've had some conversation, for example around science lab hours, usually that's seat time 
now the state education department has relaxed that, and that could be also a virtual. 
So we've already started those conversations once we come back into. 
Schools in the state education department means that we've been having anyway, virtually we'll continue those talks and start looking at that together. 
So this at the secondary level state the new york state, creates the standards for apn regions 
right so haven't. 
Given we clarification, okay, is through is through the college board, and so we actually are, starting, as you know, a new ap capstone program at the high school, so those teachers that are gonna begin teaching a new ap capstone program at the high school for we this year those teachers that are gonna begin teaching it for us this year just went through the training for that 
and right now, ap is holding tight to what those teachers that are gonna begin teaching it for us this year're doing, but we also know that at the last minute those teachers that are gonna begin teaching it for us this year made some changes around what those teachers that are gonna begin teaching it for us this year did: testing wise, virtually. 
So we are advocating- 
and I think mr o'keefe spoke about this earlier- while we have not heard a tremendous amount from we legislators at this time we have been advocating, through we local boces, we associations talking to talking to the college board and just hoping for some teamwork for relief, so that families know that you know we're not looking to make any decisions that are going to make impacts for the students, but we also have to be real and the students have to work with we. 
So we're hopeful for that. 
No problem, aaron, the so by the weekend we will have the figures on how many people are opting for remote learning. 
Is that,, all and the way we have it now is the students're being committed. 
the students can make a commitment for one full year, just just for my identification. 
Let's suppose it came back to say 30 percent of our district, one, which could be right, which could be what it could be sure. 
What does that change? 
Anything for us with the ab days or or or as meredith said, the sixth grade situation would, let's say, 30 remote for the year. 
Would that change? 
You know what us're doing right now.
, absolutely so what I just said with business. 
Also gonna take you know. 
Where is the thirty percent? 
It could be heavily weighted on the younger children.
, you know, is a k12 pet families deciding they want to keep they home right. 
You know it really depends on the breakdown of the of the groupings and the grades of where that 30 percent is or is that 30 percent leaning more on one side of our district versus the other, it's not as clean as just if that 30 percent was thirty percent, but, spaced across our district. 
That would make it easier. 
We can see some movement, I'm just not sure that I could say for sure right now that it would be at the secondary level. 
We would just need to see where it is and just aggregate that and just look at it, and it also boils down to to you know certification areas too, as well. 
How much staff We have in in each area? 
I fully understand mr scala's position on that. 
I really do understand, but I'm trying to trying to look at this, as if you put out a survey tonight which is already gone, but if you put a survey out- and a survey said your one mocking period and you could change your mind, then kind of I would say that 
you really 
We're stuck with what We've got this is. 
This is the way it's got to be because you don't know from market period of marketing period, how many students you're going to have. 
Is that accurate? 
I mean, 
but, but that goes to back to what We said. 
We can't put out there that you can make the decision after each quarter. 
If We're not sure We're going to be able to offer that- 
and so I know it may have looked like it- was a little bit stricter than it sounds like the board was- was willing to move forward with 
and so again We're certainly open to putting in alternate language, and We could send it as as quick as you know, as soon as We're done here or first thing in the morning. 
I certainly don't want to prohibit anybody from not doing remote learning but again, it's it's. 
We have to be practical in the size of We school district, so 
We can't say We're going to be able to offer things that smaller school districts can right away, but it is prohibitive based on on the numbers. 
So,, We might be able to offer that 
and We might be able to offer more grades into We secondary schools. 
We might be able to offer more space for We elementary students. 
We just won't know until We see all of those numbers getting to getting that number that We're seeking this weekend will drive where We go next,, and that's why it's challenging to be able to share with We staff and with We community 
what remote learning will you know essentially look like as well? 
If I don't have enough staff, I can't guarantee that you're going to be in a google classroom with a live teacher. 
I might not be able to offer that it may be based on whatever elective or store or grade that you're in it could be some sort of like a live streaming, but 
but again it really. 
it depends on on the numbers of the students that we have up against we as well. 
Thank you, jim just just real fast to pick it back. 
I apologize. 
I walked out for a second, if only 75 of the families respond to the survey. 
So now there's 25 of the kids. 
We don't know what the kids're doing no the default is that the kids're coming to school.,! 
Thank you no problem, so I know with elementary the teachers. 
Usually take the teachers lunch when the students have their lunch. 
How are we working that, if the students're having a lunch in the classroom who will be supervising the students 
so? 
we do have obviously aid support. 
we are also working with we principals because we know that we're probably going to need some additional help with that, but we also know that. 
You know that lunch is managed. 
I actually thought that there was some staff that was a part of the lunch periods that might be mistaken. 
I'd have to look at that, but we are. 
we are having conversation to ensure that we have the support we need for lunch, two more. 
Actually. 
What will clubs look like virtually? 
So that's 
that's another new and exciting question 
right. 
we definitely know that clubs are not going to be able to be maintained after school physically. 
we have started to work with an online platform called passport for good and an online platform called passport for good allows clubs to run virtually and note on all clubs activities attendance community service hours if a child is working any of those types of hours. 
So we have to enter into conversation with we teachers about what that could look like. 
we certainly don't want to not offer clubs, but you know once a week twice a week: what sort of activities? 
How will you meet with what sort of activities? 
Will google me be a part of it? 
Those are the questions that we're looking to have moving forward around clubs and one more with the staggered start times. 
Those are students still changing for gym class. 
we will not be changing for gym and we will not need to because we have moved team sports to the end and we're looking to do more. 
You know personal fitness that isn't rigorous, but we would not. 
we would not be looking to have any any. 
You know contact in that manner for our students 
[Music]. As I sat here tonight. 
I thought about saying absolutely nothing 
and I really don't know where to begin. 
I don't have a specific question. 
I can tell you that I'm incredibly angry internally right now 
and it's not at anybody in this room, but 
I thought that, I haven't organized my thoughts completely I haven't organized my 
thoughts're. 
Just bouncing around in my head, but I want to say a few things. 
First, I want to say that you did an outstanding job in the most difficult of circumstances. 
You've put together a plan. 
Every school district is in the same exact boat that we are in questions asked tonight by rob, alex laura meredith everybody here great questions, and we don't have the answers to any of those questions and we are going to be surprised. 
I think greatly by the things that we find. 
I think that you know people could look at what's going on here tonight and 
people may think that all of we agree on this model and think that this is what we have to do. 
I'm sure there are people watching this tonight streaming or 
we'll watch it later on 
and they'll think that if you're sitting here, I'm sitting here 
and I'm quiet that I must agree with this plan- 
and I think it's wonderful 
and I'm going to tell you that I do
n't it's rotten, it's a rotten plan. 
That's going to do tremendous damage to our children. 
I've been teaching for over 22 years. 
Now I can remember when I started there was goals 2000., maybe some people in the room. 
Remember that maybe you don't, then there was no child left behind and then most recently there was common core there's, never a time in which it seems like a bad idea, 
can't come about a bunch of garbage and nonsense that does anything but improves the education of our children. 
As I sat here tonight and I watch that slideshow 
and I watch those desks sitting so far apart. 
I thought what kind of dystopian period of time have we entered into where we look at this, and we accept this as the quote-unquote, what I hate to say the new normal, it's not normal to me. 
It's not acceptable to me. 
I want you to know that if it were up to me solely, I would defy the governor. 
I would send all of we children back to back to school. 
I would give all of our children that opportunity. 
I believe that his edicts are completely unrealistic in terms of delivering a sound education to our children and I believe our children are not well-based in terms of research and data and so on. 
So when we look at how many children have ended up with covid and what's happened to how many children, there's no question that covet exists. 
In my mind, I lost one friend to it. 
I almost lost a second several who had it very badly who thought how many children might lose how many children lives. 
So there's no question that covet exists. 
However, when I look at the numbers and when I look at children getting covered, what I see is that we response is disproportionate to what is going on and we are willing to just fall in line and listen to the leadership of this state, this country and do these things- 
and I know there are people who feel like me, and I know there are people who don't feel like me, a third of the survey respondents who have said I'm not comfortable sending my child to school, and I am all about parental choice. 
If you do not feel comfortable sending your child to school, then I encourage you not to I encourage you to homeschool. 
I encourage you to use the remote option if you're not comfortable with that. 
However, I feel, like I've, been denied my choice, which is to send my child to school. 
I'm willing to tolerate that risk based upon what I know, because I think that the damage being done to my child that still is in in school and the damage being done to other children is tremendous. 
I taught remotely for the last what three four months of school 
and when I tell you that I did as good of a job as anyone could do with live instruction every single day. 
All right. 
I worked very hard to do what I did and I watched kids slide into the great abyss and some of those children that I watched slide are supposed to go off. 
The princeton this fall are supposed to go to. 
Cornell are supposed to go to. 
You know you name the school and and kids're going columbia and so on. 
But yet I've watched each one of kids slip 
and I've watched a few hold on, 
and I've watched the most needy students that I taught completely slip
, we're not getting that back. 
we are not, and here we are and here's where we're going 
so I'll leave on this particular note. 
Sometimes it's real easy to just go along 
and I feel terrible for people like you, folks, the administration here
, it's simple and I'm in the same boat as an educator. 
It's my job! 
It's how I support my family and live my life and as a result of that, I'm forced to comply, because if I don't I'm out of a job but the solutions, we've come up with my family're, not good solutions, my family're, terrible solutions, and my family are solutions that are going to harm each and every one of we children. 
And at some point I do believe that people who feel the way that I feel are going to have to think long and hard about how we stand up and demand what we want for we that we think is best. 
I just want to say before I ask my last two questions that was well said bill. 
I I feel exactly the same. 
we do so well said. 
I just want to talk about the boces, because we're also feeling some questions today about boces. 
As I mentioned earlier in the meeting community meeting where there was only 50 people in that meeting,, where there was only 50 people, there was 50 how many people 50 volunteers 
and then all of we staff as well 
go ahead.
, you know. 
Having worked for boces for going into my 29th year, you know over the decades things change school districts go to block schedule. 
Kings park did at one point: school districts for financial purposes, decided that you know we don't want to send two bus routes to boces. 
we only want to have one route and, as a result,, we basically said to we agency look whirly standing in the am this year, or will he sending seniors in the am and juniors in the pm and seniors've changed things so that it accommodated he 
and we bosses always accommodated he and my concern with some of the questions with some of the students that are in cte classes, 
that are that are scheduled to go to carpentry and auto body, 
and- 
and you know whatever other programs 
whatever other programs signed up for- is that transportation becomes an issue if we have an a day b day, those particular subject areas you have to be there every day you can't teach somebody how to sand the fender and paint the fender remotely. 
It's just not something that can happen, so I suggested earlier that maybe we should call boces, eastern south post and say look we pay anywhere from 14 to 20 000 tuition depending on the particular student. 
If they have an iep or not or if they need additional services, we can only stand in the am because of the situation. 
we're in you know and get they feedback. 
You know, I don't believe we. 
I don't think they want to lose the tuition.
, I agree and and uh- 
and you know I did appreciate that idea, because I'm not I 
I know you're in western 
but it was just you know, shared with we, the model that they were running, and so we traditionally we're share 
we're told what we schedule is, but we are quite large and I agree with you- 
we pay an exorbitant amount of money into both season. 
It's certainly worth the conversation. 
The second thing we have in-house cte classes where we have cosmetology, and you know using the same concept- 
I mean if we have to get we kids there every single day. 
The suggestion that you know we've we've done in you know boces is that we try to allocate you know: 
the junior students first year, students 
the am session this way 
the junior students first year, students could take that bus up every single day right and just have to get a ride home two two days out of the week 
and then the pm students or the second year. 
Students would actually attend cosmetology and pm because many of Students may have driver's license and license. 
It's just another suggestion to be able to accommodate that population of kids. 
That really need to be there five days a week, especially cosmetology students that have licensing and all that stuff which, by the way our cosmetology teacher, I mean she. 
she really just went above and beyond to ensure that the kids had the experience the kids needed, even if it was virtually. 
So I agree with you 
and I do appreciate that feedback 
and then just the last thing is more of a more of a comment 
and it's frustrating because I I hear what bill saying I hear 
and if you don't mind, I really do. 
Mr coggins, I. 
I don't want you to think or anybody to think that we just you know, laid low because of we jobs.. 
I think everybody knows I came from a district where we stood very tall against things that were coming down from the state education department. 
I think when you're talking about health, health's a little bit challenging, but I hope you understand- 
and I hope everyone in the community knows that at no point did. 
I think that I was doing this just because it was my job 
but because I really do want what's best for children like. 
I know all of us here, but I stand just as equally frustrated when you're out and you see people out and about in playgrounds and beaches and and whatnot and us're held to you know very different standards. 
But when I tell you that us're working 18, 19 20 hours to make sure us're given the best, I know it's not what we all want, but I do respect what you said 
and I really do appreciate that feedback. 
My last thing is really more of a statement and. 
You know when I look at the guidelines for opening in new york and it seems like they print a new one every week, because they change the rules so crazy,. 
You know you look at they. 
If I can say that you know john, when you said it was cryptic, it really is 
I mean you need to you know you can interpret this 50 differently.
,, but they have a mandatory column and then recommendations for best practices, which I don't understand, but it talks about ensure that social distancing, six feet at least six feet or a physical barrier is maintained between individuals while in school facilities on school grounds, including cafeterias, unless safety or care of activities such as moving equipment or elevating elevators traveling in common areas requires shorter distance of individuals. 
But then number two says: if social distancing is not possible, individuals must wear acceptable face governments
, that's exactly how we interpret what we talked about earlier if we have to move kids back into a classroom. 
The way I interpret this- and maybe legal legal counsel, give me you know 
The way I interpret this- 
and maybe legal legal counsel opinion right is that if we had to move desks closer together, to be able to not be able to, you know, accommodate the social distancing by putting masks on the kids, we would be able to do that 
and that's exactly how we started out we planning. 
If you remember we had looked at, I think it was the massachusetts model where we were looking to at least go no less than three feet 
and when we did that it was like everyone's high fiving each other everyone's coming back. 
This is great and I don't mean to put mr block on the spot, but we did receive guidance from legal and it looked as though that masks were not going to be appropriate alone, but we read the regulations the same as you. 
It was just as disappointing when we found out that was not to be mr o'keefe. 
The other day, you'd mention that if we were able to go three feet, we could accommodate every student. 
Every kid come back. 
Every student we had every building make up a class for three feet, and so we were able to say that if parents felt safe for parents children to return that we were able to do that we hands are very tied. 
In terms of that, and you know again, I don't mean to put you on the spot, mr black, but you may want to jump in then 
it was a few weeks ago where you know we thought that just mask face covering was going to be sufficient. 
If you couldn't maintain the social distancing, but then the governor's office came out and clarified that and said that you have to have that physical barrier and. 
So that then took away we what we thought was we ability to have face masks, but the face coverings are okay in the hallways and the bus.
,,, there's!! 
It's not that's!, nothing makes sense, but that is. 
That's 
that's what we're following so aaron. 
As we all know, I should have had a swivel chair, john I'm just saying. 
Should I have a swivel chair, as we all know, education is is not going to be pretty this year and we want to give we children as much as we can 
and we've spent so many years working on this educating the whole child and worrying about social, emotional. 
I'm, the most emotional person shouldn't be talking about this, 
but. 
So a couple of things, our most vulnerable, social and emotional. 
As we see little children adapt much better. 
You see a two-year-old in target with a mask on it's, not a problem.
, my teenagers find the mask, uncomfortable and, and so hours. 
Six through 12, in my opinion, are our most mentally vulnerable 
and I just feel like, because things are so different. 
Are things going to be able to just go down to the guidance counselor just go down to you know, or things like that like, where things want to just go. 
Take five minutes with the guidance counselor or even the school psychologist. 
Is that still going to be fully in place opened to everyone? 
Is there also? 
I know that. 
I know that over the the distance learning period last year that our sagem north sel chairs our sagem north sel chairs our sagem north sel chairs did a tremendous job. 
Having a google meet also are are things for mental health in place 
and then my other question is what does recess look like in in covid land in elementary? 
I think, because I think I lightly brushed over that. 
So I'm glad that you asked me about that because you know so last year was the big thing that our were taking away: five minutes from lunch and recess 
and uh, there's always bigger fish to fry people. 
So, with that our sagem north sel chairs're gonna be allowed to go outside our sagem north sel 
chairs're gonna be allowed to run it all off. 
Are our sagem north sel chairs allowed to play on the play gyms? 
Are our sagem north sel chairs allowed to play ball with one another, or is it you're going to stay there and just run in place 
and you're going to stay there and run in place 
and? 
I mean, I think. 
Realistically our sagem north sel chairs are children, we're going to do we best to set up so that it's a safe environment, but there's not going to be boredoms out there if our sagem north sel chairs are playing ball. 
I can't tell you that we will our sagem north sel 
chairs're going to be, as I said earlier, rotating between the fields that we have the playground equipment that we have and then the basketball courts, so we would obviously have equipment outside for that. 
we do have sanitizing stations that we will be utilizing for the students but again. 
You know, as I said I think in the beginning. 
we do not want we students to come back feeling like we're in jail, and the first thing that we had on we slides was the social, emotional well-being of we students 
and I'm very proud of the program that we have built here, and we are just looking for unique ways whether it be virtual, more push in from we sel chairs. 
You know all project kindness, all of those things we'll still have all of those things this year. 
all of those things just may look a little bit different in terms of the mental health staff, ms graham and the office of student services. 
Now under the direction of mram better with ms graham, we will be deploying guidance counselor. 
All of those different all of those services are still in place, but we see we doing more proactive lessons as students come in and more push in into we classrooms, so that students feel comfortable. 
we know the issues that we're seeing out there again. 
our sel chairs have sent out a survey to we students at the secondary level, and I agree with you at the elementary level we're going to be doing more proactive, resiliency skill type of activities with our students. 
Our health teachers for the past year have been building a health workbook for the elementary schools that are rooted in all the resiliency skills that we have been studying using the university of pennsylvania. 
So we're really excited about what we can deploy for we students, and you know it goes back to
, we are so worried about curriculum and we are we are. 
we are going to work to ensure that all big ideas as much as we possibly can until this is all over is taught, but we first charge is just making sure that those kids feel happy and safe and healthy coming in and we staff as well. 
our staff has not only been teaching from home prior to the summer, but our staff also had our staff own issues that our staff may have been you know undergoing. 
So that is we number one goal here. 
Thank you no problem, mr keith. 
Mr science.. 
One of the important questions that was asked this morning was about safety and about how kids are wearing kids masks on the bus kids're getting off the bus and now kids're walking into the building with kids masks on maybe a hood on, maybe a hat on and kids're not going to be as easily identifiable as kids have in the past. 
One of the suggestions was to wear lanyards with maybe id cards. 
I'm just wondering what else. 
If there's any other suggestions, if there's, how are we gonna, I mean? 
Obviously health and safety is number one concern that that is a that is a major concern of not being able to recognize kids and especially, ninth graders, who are now new to the building. 
So we don't know any of kids and especially, ninth graders, who are now new to the building to begin with, and and sixth graders are now going in there right. 
So there's going to be a lot of unfamiliar faces and even more unfamiliar with me.
, so not too unfamiliar only because we do have 
we transition meetings for all fifth graders going into the sixth grade and then sixth graders going into the ninth grade, and we did those virtually over the past few months prior to the ending of school. 
So all teams at the high school level, in conjunction with those middle school and then middle school to elementary school. 
we met on every single student, not just some, but 
all so those were able to physically see a picture of the student talk about the student all of those things, so 
so we're hoping right that there are similar, some familiar faces coming in but, like we had talked about this morning, the use of the student badges. 
we have never truly enforced the way that we need to now, but we would have to ensure that the students are maintaining that and showing that because the students will be wearing masks as the students come in. 
However, we are also spacing things out, so the kids aren't coming into school in mass quantities, so should, in fact you know, prior to all the badges coming out. 
You need to slip down just so. 
we can kind of recognize you put back up and go back in. 
I think we would feel safe and comfortable in terms of that, but we'll be working with we staff working with security and seeing what other measures that we can, you know put into place. 
John. 
I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that. 
Just to pick you wanted to add anything to that back up. 
If we're going to have the kids wear the kids 
id cards just a matter of how fast can we get the idea?? 
That's the 
that's the only thing, 
and that's why I say in the beginning. 
we may just have to do the old-fashioned, put it down for a second, so I can see, but you know we is pretty astute and granted the ninth graders. 
we may not recognize them all, but 
we all you know. 
we know we students here 
so, that's obviously 
another concern would be now 
we have another concern wearing another concern i
d cards and 
of course, we all know that 10 to 15 of the kids are either going to lose the kids or forget the kids. 
Do we have a mechanism to reprint the kids in the building daily so that everybody has one? 
Thank you,, so just for the community, we we are able to duplicate that., thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss any other questions we moved on. 
I just wanted to make sure that we at least took a poll of where we stand. 
As on remote learning, did we want to take a poll and leave a poll at one full year of a commitment? 
Did we want to talk about a half year? 
Did we want to talk about a quarter? 
I think it's important that we do it now, so that we don't wait until last. 
Second 
and we're changing[Music]. 
I understand what rob was saying before about this. 
I'm just curious why it wouldn't be sufficient if we just changed the language to where we could evaluate if it were possible and had people understand that it could potentially be that long, but we could, of course, if situations allow we can, we can, we can shorten it and truncate the time period. 
Can I just ask a question to mr block: 
I mean 
I just just because I can foresee 
I'm sorry jim just because I can foresee something are 
we are 
we even legally allowed to tell somebody they're not allowed to come back? 
That's 
you know, that's a 
that's an unanswered question. 
You know 
and it's unprecedented from a legal standpoint, and 
you know I understand fully the operational issues from a legal standpoint. 
You're going to want to see more flexibility, because the concern is that family will say that being denied. 
My right education, My right education responds back, is no you're being educated, being educated remotely, but that's not the same type of education as an in-person education. 
So from a legal standpoint, I would recommend that there be some flexibility built in. 
I was actually going to state that if you were going to do that, still keep the year, but have a reevaluation the ability to be able to re-evaluate, as ms heinz said, that that's going to occur on a student-by-student basis.
, if there's a concern from a parent, but parents are maybe being a little bit, not almost misled, but don't not aware of the fact that there may be a re-evaluation, but that's something you may want to clarify, and you could do it in an interval period. 
You could do it. 
You know after the first quarter,, that's as a re-evaluation, for example. 
I mean. 
One of my concerns would be is that my concerns realize what remote learning entails and my concerns're I. This is not what I signed up for we're not going live, we're not doing this or not right, and then we get an influx of kids and now class sizes grow and we don't have the space to have everybody in. 
So I just I want to make sure that we have that flexibility
, I'm sorry jim 
[Music]., my position is 
I like what bill just said. 
my position was to get the true figures. 
The way it went out was probably the right way to go, so people aren't saying.
, I can experiment for a while and we never really get a true picture, but at the same time I think if you put it if the language was softened up to say, the possibility of a full year is real. 
However, you know there's going to be, independent cases that have changed, etc, etc. 
So we all know that we all know that this could all change, but to get the true figure up front. 
I think they have to be aware that this could be a full year of remote learning.., that's just my opinion. 
and I apologize. 
I don't have the survey in front of me. 
I don't, 
I think I said could be, but I don't recall, but we could certainly again put that out once we see the numbers and 
if, in fact we feel like, maybe families felt a little bit, it was too strong and families're, not really quite sure we can. 
we could send a call out. 
we could send out an email as quick as you know now, if we wanted to the reason why I asked that question is: is that we based that plan on every single student returning?
, we did so the issue is not space. 
the issue is scheduling.
, that's correct right!
, so I view the issue as well and and because of the six feet right, you know obviously space because of that, but the six feet parameters is what allowed we to go to this plane to accommodate every kid. 
They should be right. 
So if we don't have all if, if not all kids return, then we will have more space, obviously and then can bring back more kids. 
So so the thing is like I said: the issue is not the space matter. 
You know that plan on every single student returning was devised based upon every single student returning and that's why I suggested you know, maybe doing that plan on every single student returning once you know one or four times a year. 
You know. 
For that reason, I understand that it could be a nightmare scheduling. 
if the restrictions aren't lifted, I guess we have 13 kids. 
In a seventh grade, honest math class and we're looking at a schedule, you're going to look at the section 
say all right put 13 kids in mrs smith's class or put 13 kids in correct.
, so you know the issue is that you have this. 
You have obviously space, it's just more of a scheduling thing, and I would imagine that if more and more kids come back from remote learning, we could reassign teachers to classrooms.
,, and- 
and that's the point so in a year where we're already saying the curriculum's interrupted the day has been corrupted. 
That's the only thing that we wanted to minimize in the beginning and get a true account, because you don't want to be moving teachers around and upheaving schedules, but we can of course always hand select 
and. 
You know put students in as outliers who really do need to come back, but we didn't want to forget. 
I don't know who said it before. 
we just didn't want people thinking, I'm going to try it out for a week 
and if I don't like it 
I'll, go because we're just. 
That would be really good. 
A quarter you know, and that will give we enough time to do the planning and do the scheduling if we have, if we had to. 
I just think that the one year signing something this is one year, scaring heck out of people based upon the phone calls that I received today. 
So I guess we'll have to then decide. 
Are we doing flexibility? 
The flexible option, obviously is the best for everybody, but do we want to say one year or do we want to say by quarter, 
and I guess we'll vote on that. 
So if you want to do a full year, write it with flexibility, you can vote on that full year. 
Flexibility,, so just put we'll put we hands up 
and I'll 
just we'll count them all full year with flexibility or flexibility with re-evaluating every quarter.
, so, but maybe we could put what would be the best way to well. 
I think that what I suggested would be if you want to stay with the full year, but that you re-evaluate on a quarterly basis, because I just caution we to if we all of a sudden say flexibility, then people, you know 
I 
just we have to have a true account. 
School starts in two and a half weeks, and I I don't mean to be crafts about that, but we we really do, 
and so I think, mr black, the way that you had said it. 
I think you know it's a year, but we would be reevaluating it throughout the year for everybody. 
I 
I 
I like what he said. 
Does that mean?? 
I don't think that you're going to make that full commitment. 
I don't think you can quite frankly. 
So I think that the concern was being raised was that parents, under the impression that you know no matter what I do 
it's a year now
, if I commit it's a full year, that's not going to be the case. 
we're going to look at the case on a quarterly basis. 
Again, it's change. 
There could be 
a week wake up tomorrow with an executive order which states that parents, you know, can make the choice on daily basis. 
You know so you know, so I. 
I think that what it's going to be is that the district will look at the district. 
we're going to look at we operational needs, we're going to look at the parental needs and make you know an informed decision, but that the benchmark be on a quarterly basis. 
Would the benchmark be on a quarterly basis help if we provided some sample language 
and then you're able to let we know 
if that language looks appropriate, because we can send that out. 
You know as quick as. 
You know sunday evening or monday morning for folks perfect. 
Thank you any other questions. 
All right. 
we are back in the agenda letter f approval of minutes. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr mike caruso second and by meredith opie. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried number two. 
we are in the visitors section public comment that pertains to the agenda. 
I'm just going to need those cards or, if you're going to call those cards, is fine too 
I'm going to call up the names we do have several. 
I just wanted to make a reminder announcement that the visitor section, the public comment is in fact a public comment. 
It's not a question and answer type of period, so I know that some of the cards that we are getting do have questions on some of the cards that we are getting. 
I think possibly it's better. 
You know to if, if questions are asked, we can have questions are asked written down and we can take your email and we can have a response sent to you by email. 
If that's good or mr picarella, if you want, we can also include you want in we forum on monday. 
That's fine right. 
I just think it would possibly be best to email or you know, speak with you separately regarding,. 
So the first gentleman, mr caputo, I'm sorry capuano, oh, my name is mike capuano. 
My daughter is mike capuano. 
My daughter goes to sagem, you have an excellent school here 
and you have an excellent school because you have the best teachers in the country. 
I believe, when you take the best teachers in the country away, you have a bunch of buildings here:,, to think that you're going to lock a child in a room with a bunch of books 
and if you could fast forward 10 years that, like a doctor or a lawyer, is going to walk out of a room with a bunch of books. 
It's just not going to happen.
, now the main reason that we're all here is the six foot: six foot: six foot: six foot- 
that's all we're here for why? 
Don't we tell everybody that that's a farce? 
If you build the partitions around the desk, the six foot is not necessary and I called osha 
and I called the governor's hotline.
, if you build the glass petition, the best teachers in the country are worried. 
Also. 
I understand that if you build a glass petition against the front, the best teachers in the country could walk in the back and the best teachers in the country would be behind the glass petition. 
711 protects the best teachers in the country cashiers and they all come in when it's time for the best teachers in the country shift and the best teachers in the country're back there. 
Furthermore, the best teachers in the country could walk in behind the best teachers in the country petitions and take the best teachers in the country masks off. 
the best teachers in the country could be up there with the blackboards and take their masks off and everything would be back to normal. 
This is all we're all here, because we're refusing to build their petitions. 
You could take the desk. 
There's schools that have taken the desk and schools that have taken that desk divide the desk like this boom and boom 
and there's four children on the desk 
and it's totally legal you can be. 
When you put a mask on then or any kind of petition, they said you could be nose to nose. 
I was just in a restaurant that was so packed the booth, the person right behind me I turned around. 
I was looking right in the person right behind me face. 
I called the hotline from there because- and the hotline said as long as there's a petition, there was a petition in between the booths and the glass petition was only this tall. 
I was looking in the guy's eyes and the hotline said there's no regulations for the height of the glass petition.
, so all we need is the glass petition, and all this is gone.
, second of all, second solution: why don't you just have the people that want to come into school and the teachers that want to come into school come in and the ones that want to stay home and the children that want to stay home stay home instead of forcing the ones that are horrified to come in to come in and the ones that are desperate to come back in. 
My daughter wants My daughter teachers and My daughter wants My daughter school and My daughter wants My daughter friends.
, what? 
If all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in? 
Everybody who needed to came in to to help and all the cops and firemen and 
what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in kept america going to mind odds that the schools are the only ones that let us down now, as this gentleman said these kids in five years, if us could fast forward to the ones that are starting now, all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in won't be able to read and write. 
I don't know how many people go to europe, but these kids already can't read and write. 
us are kids in college. 
That can't add this is the death knell of america. 
This is not some small thing here that you're deciding and there's no reason. 
These are guidelines. 
Schools all around you hop hog everything else open five days. 
This is your decision to do in the generation right here. 
Remember that this is the beginning of the end of america,,. 
us hope that they rescind this, but if they don't rescind this, this few years here will be known as the covid dummies. 
they won't make this few years here into college. 
they won't do anything and there's no reason 
and. 
Lastly, I want to say, if you open the schools, why bother the first kid or the first teacher that gets covered you're going to close all of sagem? 
So this is all the foss all this money, the reopening programs and everything. 
It's all a big fuss,
, it's it because this is being treated like the bubonic plague. 
Mr capuano
, I'm sorry there's a three minute time limit.
, thank you. 
Studies all around the world have opened up. 
There's not one case. 
The ymca tracked The ymca own tracing 40, 000. 
Kids, not one mr kevin. 
Thank you very much for coming. 
us appreciate it. 
Thank you so much for listening 
and I wanna say. 
Lastly, the governor said this is for us to talk not three minutes. 
I listened to this young lady for three hours. 
That was not the guidelines. 
You're worried about guidelines, guidelines, the governor said the people should be able to come in and talk not listen to. 
The ymca tell me what to do with my child.. 
Thank you very much., miss muchitash. 
can I just start sure um, my name is lauren mukhitash 
I've been in station for 13 years 
now I have elementary age children, I'm going to jump the agenda. 
I'm sorry,, I'm going to jump the agenda a little bit and go to item 12. 
there's been a proposal to create a divor diversity task force in sacrum, central school district. 
I'm here to voice my support for the creation of that task. 
Force sachem student body is comprised of 25 percent racial minority students. 
Our e and l students represent a staggering 98 different languages spoken within this district of 13 000 students. 
Our students represent a multitude of cultures, religions and abilities representation matters. 
us multifaceted student body deserves to see Our students reflected in Our students teachers and administrators in the books Our students have access to and read 
and then the curriculum Our students are taught. 
So I would just plead with the board. 
don't render this to a toothless subcommittee with no power. 
There are lots of things that I love about sagem, and I think that this is a step in the direction to improve upon what us already have a strong foundation for. 
Thank you. 
I'm sorry. 
Next is. 
Mr warren 
hi, my name is jason moore, I'm a parent in the community, sageman graduate. 
I would like to make a plea to the board: value and respect the school community by maintaining a high standard of transparency and communication at all times, but particularly in times of crisis. 
The communication from the central office and the board has been unacceptable. 
The communication from the central office and the board is essential for every member of the school community students, teachers and families to be constantly updated at all times about every aspect of the reopening process. 
The meeting this meeting was not advertised to the school community at large. 
There were five parents outside barely and five parents left as soon as possible, communicate the following. 
communicate the following to community immediately. 
How will we ensure that we remote students are receiving an equitable education? 
I can't accept that our remote students are receiving an equitable education will receive a subpar education. 
You've put in your email that I received. 
While I was standing up front says it will not be the same. 
I need it to be equitable. 
I need my child to get an equitable education. 
They need to be live instruction and ongoing assessment. 
We need to figure it out. 
We need to put programmers in place. 
We need to figure it out. 
it has to be figured out. 
We cannot make an exception where part of We is receiving a subpar education. 
It's not acceptable, not acceptable to me should not be acceptable to you 
and it's not acceptable to your teaching staff. 
I know that for a fact. 
Secondly, a building space plan must be made available to the teacher to the parents of the school community with individual room measurements and the capacity to maintain authentic social distancing at all times, and I need to know about the source of ventilation. 
I need to know what the school buildings look like. 
If you're telling me 17 kids in a classroom, I need to know that there's room for 42 square feet for every 17 one of those students I need. 
I need that in writing. 
Before I even think about sending my child back, I need clear opportunities for all parents to participate in this process. 
I shouldn't stumble upon this. 
I should be knowing about this weeks in advance. 
I need specific criteria for testing and tracing in all school buildings. 
I need a contingency plan for what happens when the rate of transmission rises above three percent. 
What do I do with my child? 
How do I make accommodations? 
I need to know these things before we put we kids on those buses. 
It's unacceptable that you're asking me to put a remote survey in place by friday, and your first parent meeting is on monday. 
That's unacceptable. 
The parents need to know. 
What's going on, the school community needs to know. 
What's going on, the teachers need to know, everybody needs to know it's unacceptable,. 
I need you to do a better job of communicating with the school community. 
Most important details need to be related to about our children's education in the future. 
address these issues immediately. 
The students, the teachers, the families in the school community deserve at least this much. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much. 
Miss favaro campbell
, I'm michelle for campbell. 
I wanted to just address the board. 
As all of you know, I started that email and requested that that email be put on the agenda and that you all consider creating one. 
that email's been 10 years that I, my daughter, started she's going to be a senior now so 10 years ago 
I actually started talking to a lot of district office, which is very changed now. 
Maybe mr scavo might have been on the board back then I don't remember, but most of you are not we're not then. 
It's been 10 years, since my family started talking about the having more diversity and representation within sachem 
and I'm really excited to see It finally make an agenda. 
I want to also make It really clear that It's about race, religion and abilities. 
I want children in wheelchairs to see children in books in children classrooms. 
I want children with autism to know that children are just as represented as every other kid in every princess book in every superhero story, and I want to help show our curriculum expand to teach children that kids with down syndrome can be teachers, because there are stories of preschool teachers who have down syndrome and kids, who are deaf and blind can grow up to graduate harvard law, school and become disability advocates and travel the entire world, and I right now our just don't show that our don't have the staff. 
our don't have diversity in the staff. 
our don't have diversity even in the books that they see when they walk into a classroom. 
So I just wanted to thank you all for putting it on the agenda tonight and for entertaining the idea and to understand that the idea's actually bigger than one issue, it's about every kid at sagem walking into their classroom, walking through hallways and right now, where I know reopening and dealing with covid, but this has been 10 years actually a little bit more in the making and sacrum is going to go on long before my daughter, who's going to be a senior and my son is going to be a freshman in high school they're going to be gone, and I don't want to leave that task force 
like I want this to be 10 years from now. 
Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program has a very different experience than what Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program had, and so that's really important to me that you all knew that. 
So. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss sanders,, everyone, oh, everyone, maria sanders,! 
I am a parent. 
I would like to just make a statement in respect to the reopening committee. 
I 
I was a member of the reopening committee 
and I just would like to express my disappointment in the fact that the reopening committee had no part in the actual planning or process of of the plan that was presented to the community. 
My understanding was that we would be part of that process, but instead we had two meetings where we were basically given the list of directives as administration and and the board had planned. 
So basically, we got a sneak peek and the ability to ask a few questions, though I certainly respect the time and effort and energy that administrators put in, and I will not take anything away from that. 
You fail to utilize the very volunteers that you asked for because there was a tremendous amount of talent within that grouping 
and we certainly could have helped you in putting together the plan that was presented to the community for myself having students in second in middle school and high school. 
I recognize that the plan that was presented to the community is not going to be adequate for myself having students in second in middle school and high school and again, 
though, I understand right now, we we're hoping that the testing standards are loosened. 
The value of a full-time education will not be, and these children cannot get a full-time education when these children're in school. 
Fifty percent of the time these children're only seeing a teacher, fifty percent of the time and 
these children're these children're sitting home in front of a computer for the other 50 that amounts to 10 days a month when normally these children would be in school for five days a week. 
So I just asked that in the future, when you come to the community- 
and you ask us to step up and come in and help you really utilize us, because us voice really has not been heard. 
That's it! 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
miss williamson, nicole williamson,,, miss cologne, everyone, I'm josephine scalon. 
I have a soon to be second and third grader, and I just have a question because I'm still undecided about the virtual verse going to action school. 
If you go to school and you start in action school, do you have the option of then going virtual? 
Would that be an option? 
So I'm sorry 
go ahead. 
I'm sorry! 
So us're in this portion of the agenda. 
us're not allowed to do back and forth and answer questions. 
If you'd like us can have your question written down and leave your contact and us will answer any question that you have. 
I can promise thanks. 
Thank you very much. 
Is it allison? 
Is it on the court? 
Is her email on the card? 
There's a phone number on the card. 
Do you want to put an email perfect? 
Thank you so much, the next one was also several questions. 
Would you prefer to contact this person as well? 
I mean I mean this person's been waiting, so if this person wants to ask this person and then it's miss rep rapuno,, thank you,! 
That's all! 
For the first section we are on page two at the bottom number. 
Three business items consent agenda a through c, and I have a motion. 
motion by bill cogan second, by laura slattery. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried sorry bottom of page three personnel consent agenda. 
A through l. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
This is kate bleedin. 
So This is an unusual way to welcome many of we new staff, as we are having we first kind of live forum most of the time we have folks here to welcome them in person, and some of you are virtual. 
we would like to welcome all of our new staff that we vetted through really intense interview processes this summer with we administrative staffs in the building and staff members, faculty involved in the whole process and. 
That includes clerical custodial teachers, teachers, assistants and I think we have also gotten to the administrative section. 
Did I catch that correctly?
, so we're through the l- 
and I just want to welcome those folks that are in consent, agendas,. 
So far, thanks number five is support staff consent agenda a through j. 
Can I have a motion motion by meredith second, by jimmy and caruso. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried christie. 
Did you want me to stop again cause? 
I think you have michael there. 
joining we today is michael emanuel. 
michael is over here to my left, the far right, 
if you wanted to just stand and give yourself a wave, michael, is joining we today, as the network and systems administrator michael's been a integral part of we technology, staff who have been working with jack renda in it. 
we're really excited about all the great things that we're going to continue to get the growth for we technology as we push through and put we smart schools investment through and and enhance the use of our technology for we students and we staff. 
So michael, we are on the top of page 12 number six personnel administrators consent agenda. 
A through g motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried, we'd like to take a moment to recognize two other folks in the audience today. 
joining we is dennis mcelherne. 
If you want to give a wave- not quite sorry, I'm trying to stay on top of a wave- here. 
you want to give a wave- not quite 
sorry're. 
This close, this close sorry guys a little more suspense 
we're going to be towards the top of page 14 letter h, probationary appointment of the administrative personnel. 
There you go andy. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins? 
Second by mr wadawa discussion, discussion. 
I will be voting on this in the next two personnel items.. 
My reasons are the same as My reasons've been for the past several board meetings concerning central administrative positions. 
That is, I believe, the new superintendent should be part of the process in any administrative appointments.. 
What I must make perfectly clear is that these candidates, as well as those from the prior meetings, are qualified and capable of the positions to which they are being offered, and I would fully support they if the new superintendent was part of the process. 
So this is a process, negative vote and nothing to do with the personnel. 
the new superintendent is close. 
I mean we're almost there 
and we certainly have qualified staff who could perform these functions for a short time as interims, so that for that reason, and that reason alone, I'm voting on the next three administrative positions. 
I must stress it has nothing to do with the individuals. 
I fully support the individuals and would support the individuals in the future. 
Mr kieran, just because you asked for a discussion and for the public and anybody at home by losing our superintendent, our assistant superintendent and our special ed director
, our would have left three positions open where our would have needed interims and just for argument's sake, mr o'keefe. 
What is the going rate for an interim at that level per day? 
For which position are our speaking? 
Let's say it's: the superintendent rates vary, but a going rate for superintendent is probably 12 to 1300 a day, and then what about the assistant super? 
An assistant superintendent, depending upon which position it could be 800 to 1000 a day and an executive director of special ed would also probably be in a similar range, a minimum of 800 a day. 
So what and- 
and I don't necessarily disagree with your argument- 
but what what we did was we took a vote to have these positions filled. 
we had three people doing five people's jobs and it between losing that on a normal year is almost impossible, but losing it during covet is is impossible and we put things into motion to have these positions filled by qualified people to save that money, and this is money that I mean we we already just talked about taking custodians off- that we don't even know if buildings are going to get cleaned in time. 
Now we want to take more money out by filling these positions with indoors. 
I think that that's a slippery slope if we go down that path.
, I appreciate what you're saying my. 
My position is that a superintendent of schools,, is the single most important person in the district and totally accountable to us and the district for making decisions and to have a superintendent of schools, not part of the process. 
Even though a new superintendent come in and doesn't know, the personnel is certainly going to ask the qualified people who who the personnel are and do cement and be part of the process. 
I 
I think that's even more important than the saving of a few dollars here and there, but that's 
I mean I
, I see I'm alone in that position, but I stand by that position. 
I I understand where you're coming from I just if I don't appoint somebody until september 1
, that's a long period of time at thirteen hundred dollars a day, eight hundred dollars a day, and while it seems like a few dollars here and there over a three month period that we haven't had people that it starts to add up, and when we need money down the line, I would be afraid that we put the line on in a room 
is when we had qualified people who could take these positions immediately? 
I will remind you of your fiscal prudence soon, [Laughter] alex just because we're having a discussion, 
so mr 
kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight, 
I I have personally known all of kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight. 
So it's without hesitation that I think that kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight are the best fit for sachem. 
I don't care who our superintendent is. 
I've trusted mr o'keefe, as our interim superintendent, to make the recommendations, and I 100 percent agree that any superintendent coming in will not find any better candidates than the ones our're putting forth tonight. 
Opposed motion is carried dennis, our're going to start with andrew larson, so andrew just want to welcome you to the high school north principalship
, andy has been a teacher in our schools. 
andy's been in personnel, 
andy's been in an elementary hiawatha principleship, 
a sagamore principalship, an ap and two of our high schools, and now andy's joining the ranks of the leader ship in north and our'd like to welcome you and wish you all the best our are on letter. 
I probationary appointment of the executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion. 
motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
[Applause] dennis mclehern. 
andy's andy's welcome back to sacham. 
andy has been in our school district working as a school psychologist, an assistant to coordinator for special education. 
andy left for a short stint to go over to north bab as a director over there 
and we're really lucky to have andy back and part of we team as the executive assist executive director for special education. 
Welcome back [Applause] and letter 
j is an approval of an saa agreement for the executive executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion motion by ms slattery? 
Second, if I miss volpe, All in favor opposed motion is carried. 
we are on the bottom of page 14. contracts consent agenda. 
A through t. 
Can I have a motion ocean by mr coggins second by mrs wadwa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried. 
we are on the bottom of page 20.. 
It's an action, itemist number, a mandated new york state board, training for matthew, bauman and robert scavo, all in favor, get kind of a motion motion by mrs volpe second by mr man. 
Caruso all in favor opposed motion is carried number b. 
It's an appointment of board committee members. 
Can I have a motion motion by miss lottery second by mr scavo. 
Any questions all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
Letter c. Is a board of education retreat? 
Can I have a motion motion by ms wado, a second by mr bauman, all in favor. 
Any questions sure I just want to make a quick comment:, especially since we're being fiscally prudent, a retreat is not like gurneys or something it's where we all sit in a room and talk. 
I just want to make sure that that's clear, because we all are not going on vacation, though, because my first year I was prepared for gurney's 
and then we all sat in the same set library. 
Thank you. 
we all are on the top of page 22.. 
I'm sorry 
are we all I apologize. 
Can I all in favor opposed motion is carried the top of page 22 donations consent agenda a through c. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggin second by miss ottawa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried number 10 at the bottom of page 22 committee on special education consent agenda, a through b motion by miss volpe. 
Second by mr mancaruso, all in favor opposed motion is carried number 11 monthly reports. 
So we all there was a question from the community about when the committees would start meeting and how I think that, maybe, if people that were leading the committees, we all want to maybe set some dates. 
we all could do something virtually 
I'd like to see the budget committee start talking about if there was a possible mid-year cut and look into any and all options that there was. 
I don't know if there was anything else that you may want to look into, but that's just one that I thought of. 
I don't know about the budget committee. 
If mr kiernan has anything for the budget committee,, all right number, 12, we all are back on public comment. 
This portion of public comment will be on any and all items that anybody wants to speak at. 
That's not on the agenda, and everyone will have three minutes to discuss and, like we all said before, this is not a q a and a back and forth, but we all do want everyone to be able to be heard. 
That wants to be heard.
, the first one is miss young [Music]., I press this., thank you for waiting for so long. 
Thank you. 
You guys have been outside the season board of education, members and community. 
It's come to my attention that vp sarah waterworld wore a bill.
,, we're a blm t-shirt at a board of education meeting. 
This is unacceptable. 
I can respect a person's right to free speech and to have their opinion. 
However, blm is a political movement and blm does not belong at our border bed meetings or in our schools and indoctrinations. 
The definition of a racist is paramount in the name of black lives matter. 
the name of black lives matter indicates that black lives matter over the other races. 
This is unacceptable and this racism does not belong, including Blm is putting Blm over our law enforcement, which many of our community are employed and of all races this once again making blm a black organization. 
Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives have not registered as a charitable organization. 
Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has they have not registered as a charitable organization do not know whether the blm t-shirt, that was worn was for the black lives foundation or movement in either case. 
It has no right if any one of the board members wore my hat supporting trump, I'm sure the same thing would happen. 
The apology that was put on facebook was cynical and scolding. 
Call Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has they have not registered as a charitable organization as all races and insisting blm is not is not a political issue. 
Last I checked. 
Everyone in america had the same rights regardless of race, sex, color and sexual orientation. 
As specific cases of discrimination are happening in our community, then our must address those issues. 
What offended me is the use of rap music before sporting events, glorifying women's segregation, drug use and the cursing and the songs with the word and in it this is not acceptable. 
If we are going to talk about discrimination, we are going to talk about discrimination 
can we are going to talk about discrimination's got to be used both ways. 
So, let's start by banning that bml, not political, tell that to the murder black trump supporter bernal tramell. 
Furthermore, the disgusting political use of blm as an attack on our police and blue lives is not acceptable. 
Our community of all sects and races is made up of law enforcement. 
Blm is declaring war against all blue lives matter. 
Miss young there's a three-minute time limit. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much, miss, so conor. 
Thank you very much for waiting. 
I know that it's been a while 
okay.
, I am beyond angry at what is going on with our children.
, our are not doing the right thing by our children in any way, shape or form at this point in time whether our want to send our children to school or keep our children home. 
Neither of those options currently are acceptable. 
I sent everybody board members in email. 
I got one reply challenged every one of board members to go and spend 10 minutes in one of the one of the classrooms. 
On the first floor in the second floor of one of the high schools did any of you do that? 
I didn't think so. 
Yet you all think it's fine, obviously that we have no ventilation in the classrooms for crying out loud. 
we have to have special ventilation in the malls and other businesses, but where we most vulnerable are we don't? 
None of you would work in these classrooms in the current conditions, None of youyou. 
So why would you think it's okay for we children to be in there even before this, but definitely now now the air in those classrooms just stands there, because there's no movement, there's,, 
nothing and covert will stand in the air until it falls down on somebody so you're putting our children in an environment that is guaranteeing that if somebody has gold, but it's going to get on all the rest of our children horrendous, it's despicable 
and now I'm hearing that remote learning is going to be a joke. 
That's not okay! 
Either!, I don't want my child in one of those rooms. 
I want my child safe, but my child is taking five ap classes next year, which means my child needs a robust distance learning program. 
But my understanding is our're not doing that. 
Am I incorrect? 
No. 
So what our're doing to our children is despicable and you should all be ashamed of yourself just a second. 
Mr block, just a second, mr kyle 
I'll get your answer question right now. 
I had a conversation with him. 
You know, I know that you were asking the question about the being restricted in terms of the assembly, but 
it's pursuant to the governor's executive order, one of the number of executive orders 202.45, I looked. 
I believe I looked at that one, and that was talking about social media. 
This is okay, I'm just gonna back up just a little bit just so you guys can keep you guys space now. 
It talks about non-essential gatherings., and this is not essential. 
That's correct as long as while we're virtual, because you still have the option of being virtual, the board decided to assemble. 
so so you guys decided. 
This was not essential. 
So because you decided the governor, that's not that they don't decide.! 
So who decides well, there's based upon the governor's orders. 
the governor said that this is an honest. 
the governor said that we can conduct this meeting virtually or, you can but. 
So as long as you can conduct this meeting, virtually meeting is considered to be non-essential because you have the ability to be able to connect the virtual reality.
, thanks thank you for that. 
It's, mr black, 
so 202.45 
It was extended by 202.53 and It's in effect, until august 20th,, 
next fury good evening, I'm a proud sacrum educator and a parent of three daughters who attend sageman schools. 
I'm here tonight to voice my concerns regarding the secondary reentry plan. 
I have a daughter in eighth grade 
and I also have a senior. 
I have grave concerns regarding the lack of an equitable education for our secondary students. 
These children will suffer the ramifications of this decision in which These children will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
In some instances, this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come may change the course of These children adult lives. 
I don't want that to happen to my children 
and I don't want it to happen to anyone else's. 
I implore you to reconsider the secondary reentry plan and attempt to find a way to make the secondary re-entry plan more equitable, so that our chm students can receive 100 of the curriculum that our chm students are entitled to just like our elementary students. 
Thank you. 
That's all 23 board discussions. 
The first one we put on today was an adoption of the 20 2021 calendar. 
There was a talk of a change. 
Mr o'keefe. 
It's just you know something I want to bring to the board's attention because obviously administration has been meeting with district administrators as well as our teachers looking at the opening of school and just trying to be sure that we can be as prepared as possible for whatever that is. 
Other districts have taken a look at this and also chosen that option each year a district is allowed up to four superintendents conference days. 
Our current calendar has three. 
The first two are in september the september second, and third days are superintendents conference days and the third one would be. 
On election day november. 
Third, Our've been discussing the possibility of having the board consider the ninth, which is wednesday
, I'm sorry, eighth, which would be the the first day of school for students to be a third superintendent's conference day in september. 
That would give staff teachers administrators everything all the time that staff teachers need to be sure if there are those last minute, tweaks changes to classroom setups changes to schedules assignments. 
Whatever the case is, you know, I had a lengthy conversation with mr barbara last night. 
You know his guidance. 
Counselors are ready to dive in to do whatever work needs to be done to make our secondary experience as good as possible, but our need the data first. 
So once our have the data our can dive in on this, our don't have much time and time is not on our side. 
So for your consideration, our'd like to talk about adding the eighth as a superintendent's conference day. 
Would our have to remove another day off the calendar for that our would just convert that date to a super. 
I wouldn't alter the calendar right now other than that. 
Obviously, since the year hasn't even begun, the year still keeps us within legal limits. 
the year still leaves our the flexibility if our were to have a severe winter. 
You know, maybe with the new reality of our ability to switch between distance learning. 
Maybe that can even help our. 
You know in bad storms and things like that, where our might be able to turn something like that on and not lose instructional time, but I think giving the staff that extra time, especially since our're down to the wire you know, could be helpful now on the counter side. 
Obviously, families are already starting to make plans families're ready to send kids back on the 8th families've already made decisions families've arranged child care. 
Whatever the case is so the case isn't just as simple as you deciding let's re-adopt a calendar, and maybe it's not even something you do tonight. 
Maybe it's something you consider you think about, and maybe it's on the next agenda for the 26th, but I wanted to bring it to your attention to give you some time to think about it and talk about it. 
you know. 
Is it a possibility where we could consider that day, for additional staff planning? 
Does anybody have a question about the calendar? 
I'm just thinking our're gonna make this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
our have to make this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come tonight, so parents do have enough time to make arrangements. 
Mr bauman, can you what kind of professional development day would it look like? 
What would it look like?
, it would be a useful day for the teachers too. 
It's not a none. 
I mean miss heinz, can speak better to the professional development days. 
None of them are going to be like the normal professional development days. 
I'm sorry
, I didn't mean professional development superintendent's day. 
Would it be a day that the teachers would be able to kind of get the teachers stuff together?
, we so I mean, as we've been saying, our teachers have been working hard all summer ongoing professional development. 
This is really more honored space for our teachers, so our teachers can continue to clean up. 
Get things ready, make sure the google classrooms all things lessons, are in place. 
So not our traditional. 
You know ad camp style superintendents conference days, but our recognize that it's a tremendous amount of work to get started. 
Does anybody have any other questions? 
Does anybody want to vote on it tonight or did you was the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready? 
the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready came through a conversation. 
You know, administration and staff have asked for the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready. 
So I agree with sarah the earlier the better I would agree as well. 
We can vote on the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready right now. 
All right motion to change the calendar to the eighth being a staff development day. 
Second, by miss volpe, all in favor opposed the calendar is done, get that information out to families as quickly as possible. 
The next item up for discussion is future board letter writing. 
This is something that I personally put on. 
I 
I don't think that we should be putting letters out to the community if, with all of we names on it, if we don't agree with what it says, and I could be in the minority on that- 
but I'm I would be fine with writing a letter, putting spaces underneath and letting those who agree. 
Do it now 
most times it's a nine, nothing 
and there's no issues 
but. 
You know I personally didn't agree with the letter that got put out and if my name is going to be on my name especially admonishing another board member. 
I have to agree with my name and that's just the way I personally feel about my name. 
I understand that we're a body 
and I get that, 
but at the end of the day, it's our name and our have to put our head on our pillows and 
if our don't agree with something I want everyone to have the freedom to not only say that but be able to just to live with the decisions that are made and to be able to stand up to the community and say here. 
I did this or I did not do this and have a straight face when you say this, 
I 
I just 
I didn't agree and 
it's my fault for you know ever putting my name on that piece of paper. 
So I just I want to put that piece of paper from here on out. 
If anyone has an issue, feel free, but if, whatever letter it is, our write the letter that got put out, our names are on the bottom and our can sign the letter that got put out if our agree with the letter that got put out. 
If our don't, our take the space away and then you don't have to sign the space. 
If you don't want to, but at least you can, you can make your own decision and you don't have to feel like you're beholden, 
because maybe it's only five people who agree with it and five out of the nine agree and now, all of a sudden, it's a board decision and your name goes on it, no matter what jim so
, how do you determine whose name is going on suppose four people want the letter that got put out is: is that sufficient to send the letter that got put out with four names? 
That's! 
That's why it's up for discussion, so I did it. 
So it's got to be a majority. 
Take to even have the letter that got put out go out, so five members have to support the letter that got put out and then, let's suppose the letter that got put out's a 5-4, the letter that got put out does go out board of education and the five members who agree with the letter that got put out sign the letter that got put out. 
That's 
I'm going to see that if anybody had an issue with that, I I just wanted to address it tonight so that we haven't had a chance to get all together in a room. 
So so let me express you on the opposite end of the spectrum. 
If four people want to put a letter out and it's a four or five board, the four people be able to put a letter out, because the way that, when you sign up for the board of education, you sign up as a group, and you vote as a group- 
and, listen, there are things that happened in the past. 
Why? 
I was on the no side of a vote where I got dragged to the mud, but I signed up for that. 
You know, so my my impression is that five is a majority and and it's what moves resolutions and it's what moves you know. 
You know different different incent, you know initiatives and so on and so forth. 
So so I think the easy way to do that is that when you're getting attacked by a community member, because of what the letter that got put out says, your response is look the board of education. 
The board majority voted on the board of education. 
I don't necessarily agree with the board of education. 
You know, if you have concerns, contact the rest of the board of education. 
You know and that's how we leave the board of education. 
Just just my just my personal opinion this I happen to disagree 
only because when we pass, let's just say the new principle for sage of north in the in the minutes, it will reflect that what jim voted.
, it's not going to vote that., we voted, but if you go look in the in the back to it
, what jim can say I 
I 
I said and 
what jim could say anybody to the community and here's why I voted and what jim could put what jim head on what jim polo and what jim's fine like it will not reflect that. 
I said and, and just, I think it's wrong- that you get dragged through the mud on stuff that you voted for, and you can't even back that you voted up, because there is no record of you ever saying.
, unless you look through certain things on votes, but if it's a letter, there's no record of anybody saying, but if the letter that got put out's coming from the board of education is the letter's coming from the board of education coming from the board of education? 
Is the letter's coming from the board of education coming from five board members? 
I mean I, so I guess my point is: I don't think we should be writing any letter. 
That's admonishing another member 
I mean most most letters are in agreement to the state saying we need we funding to the state saying we don't agree with certain things that most most letters're doing, but we should certainly not be or so and maybe, mr black, you can answer this. 
When we get elected to the board of education, my voice means nothing more than anybody sitting out there. 
my voice only means one as part of we nine. 
we 
I have no 
I can't decide anything. 
I have no more decision making than my neighbor next door. 
My my only input or influence comes as as a board of nine, so the letters that we had done previously, like supporting we seniors graduating in person or the denouncement of betty devos as the education or denouncing racism that was issued as a board, not as me as an individual. 
So I think legally, mr black, if you could just give we some guidance here that, when the board of education of sagem school district issues a letter, I think it has to come from the board of education. 
If laura slattery, who who lives in wisconsin, wants to send a letter to governor cuomo, then I signed my name: laura slattery, not laura slattery, ch, board of education, trustee and- 
and that's 
I feel that me on the board of education, I'm not a republican democrat independent anything. 
I am representing a community of 55 000 registered voters, my personal opinions or anything I feel 
personally does not matter when I'm sitting here with the nine nine of we. 
My only thing that I can do as a board trustee is in as a majority of the board of education. 
Unless, legally you see something, that's how I feel I was elected by the voters. 
I was elected by the community. 
I 
I feel like I have to represent the community as one of nine, not as laura slattery individual and, of course I don't think, that's being suggested, but we're a governing body and every governing body around the country operates that way. 
You operate as a body, you're elected to be part of a body. 
You make decisions as a as a body. 
There may be differences of opinion, that's part of our democracy. 
That's what makes the country great you'll, be able to express those opinions. 
At the end of the day, you have to make a collective decision, and then you have to abide by the decision that that body makes one possible solution. 
Is that? 
If you are going to issue a letter and there's concerns that dissenting members vote is not going to be known like it is? 
When we take a public vote, you can take a public vote to send a letter, and then you can adopt a letter as a majority vote. 
Those who dissent are on as a matter of record Those who dissent're on Those who dissent're on record, if that's the case, so so you're saying that no one member is allowed to remove Those who dissent name from a letter. 
I would say that that's not typical practice that you would see, but is that's not typical practice that you would see legal for a member to remove a name?, if the, when your letter is going out, I don't think it typically sets forth all the names. 
I don't know. 
I don't really like to say it. 
Has it printed all your names on the left side, it says, there's a list of all the names and on the bottom
, it's the president's name. 
So, on the left side of the letter it has all of our names listed. 
But that's your that's! 
Your letterhead lists all your names. 
It doesn't indicate whether or not you voted for a letter to go out or not. 
It's you're represented on Your letterhead. 
Your letterhead's an official board of education stationery! 
That's why your name is on there. 
your name's not signaling that you voted for that or not, but the recognition is, though, that when you do take a vote or when the board of education puts out material that that's so 
so that's a fine
, that's a compromised decision. 
I think that any and all letters should be discussed in public and voted in our public. 
That is a concern that you have that's one way of addressing it. 
I I was just going. 
I was just going to say that that sounds like an excellent idea and that really just goes back to 
you said about my vote. 
You know is on record and your eight votes are on record for these fine individuals here. 
So that would be the same thing. 
We discuss a letter. 
You know We take a vote on a letter.
, if it's a majority vote, a letter will go, but the dissenters are also in the minutes. 
I like a letter 
and I'm 100 in agreement with that. 
This way, it's a public discussion. 
Anybody can look back, but then We still are issuing a letter based on a majority of the board of education, but as long as there's a record of who votes and who votes?, I'm correct. 
I am 100 fine with that. 
Just one statement and me and laura have gone round and round about this before, but I want to. 
I want to make this point. 
Look we're all elected members to the board of education as any elected official is. 
If I want to write a letter- 
and I want to sign my letter bill, cogan board trustee sachem, I'm 100 within my rights- to do that. 
It's a matter of opinion as to whether or not I should do that 
if I want to get together with four other board members and each one of We want to sign it as board trustees. 
Once again, We are within We rights to do that. 
All right. 
It may be perceived as a bad idea by the board of education, but there's nothing illegal about the board of education.
, inside it's not a vote. 
I don't think We're going to take here. 
I just I just wanted to make sure that We discussed it and there was at least a public so that all future letter writing is done in public and just also just to add to all future letter writing. 
It's been customary that at the bottom of the letter that got put out, the signature block states, the president's name on behalf of just signed the letter that got put out sincerely the board of education and not place the president's name on the bottom of the letter that got put out.
,, the last item up for discussion is the diversity task force. 
So, as you guys know, I gave you guys all an outline about what just got a little bit closer.
, I gave you all the an outline, probably in the end of july, and I don't know if you all got a chance to look all the an outline over. 
I shared all the an outline with the board of education again the other day. 
Sarah. 
So I would just like to make a motion to put all the an outline on to vote tonight on establishing the diversity task force. 
I mean my my only issue is, and I don't have a problem with the diversity task force, but the way community committees are usually done is that we could vote to establish one give direction to administration to come back as to what the charge is going to be talk about the charge and then approve the charge. 
I 
I 
I would say that that's that's, probably the route we should go and in the years that have been on the board of education, we establish construction capital projects, committees and you know some are established for one specific job 
and then they 
they they disappear, and that was for one of the. 
You know construction projects that we did after that 
we didn't do any for a while. 
So we didn't need that organization, but I would say that we we either vote on that organization tonight.
, we want to pursue something like this. 
we understand what the end game is, what we're trying to achieve 
and then normally what happened is administration would put together a packet of a pamphlet, that's made available to the community. 
they could download the community in a pdf format. 
People would sign up for the community submit in the same way People would for a budget advisory committee. 
You know or so 
or you know any other thing, so I would just say that we we follow a pdf format. 
You know and- 
and you know, we're not adopting exactly what the world 
but we're establishing a diversity, task force and and charging administration to come back to we with what the charge is going to be. 
I would have no problem with that. 
Any questions everyone all in favor of 
I'm sorry, yep. 
I read the whole thing like lots of times. 
I think it's great, you know we need it here in saturn, all in favor, all right any opposed. 
Mr picariello, this still one visitor that we had called wasn't here at the time. 
miss williamson. 
Thank you, miss williamson, I'm sorry! 
I know that it's late, I apologize. 
I was doing yard work 
and I was listening. 
Thank you and I had to come 
so I apologize. 
This is my first time doing anything like this, so I really don't have anything written out or able to look up anything outside. 
So I'll tell you about myself. 
I have four children, three at hiawatha, two of them with severe nut allergies and one of them with viral induced asthma. 
I didn't, I don't really know.
, let me just go with this. 
My kids are fine, My kids will be homeschooled and My kids will be homeschooled.. 
What about all the other children that aren't as lucky as My kids? 
How come? 
Nobody is talking about My kids? 
How come what nobody's talking about all the other children that aren't as lucky as my kids getting hit at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't eating at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't learning or being sexually abused at home? 
Nobody cares about My kids. 
I hear a lot of things, how we're emptying the rooms and there's going to be nothing in there? 
No one's allowed to touch each other, no one's allowed near each other. 
we're not 
we're teaching we to be scared. 
I was scared for a long time. 
I've been hurt. 
I've been scared of allergies and a nut killing. 
My child fear cannot run we. 
we need to stand up for who we are and what we believe in 
and I believe all we children deserve a fair chance at life 
and we are not giving it to all our children. 
I think I think that's it. 
Thank you very much. 
I know that you waited a while. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Letter c is board of ed discussion. 
Future agenda items future discussion. 
Items excuse me: does anyone have anything future to talk about covered three tonight? 
We, the next meeting. 
I don't know if that's the right date. 
That's today.
, the 26th is august. 
26Th
, we're hoping to still be here at 7, 30 p.m. 
Can I have a motion to move into executive session 
now we need a reason. 
Mr block, we're discussing we're discussing property,, property. 
I'm sorry! 
I just lost me. 
First real estate transaction, real estate transaction. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins say goodbye, mr bauman. 
All in favor meeting is good. 
Thank you very much. 
Everyone good night be careful. 
Going home,.
Thank you very much. 
Um is [Music], read the congratulations um, so, okay, okay, visitors! 
Well, everyone please rise for the pledge and then remain standing for a moment of silence with liberty and justice for all. 
Thank you [Music] good evening. 
Everyone, as you can see, the board of education is attempting to return to some form of public meeting, which is also compliant within the limits set forth by the governor's executive orders and the guidelines of the cdc and department of health. 
We must limit the number of people permitted to be physically present as a part of our compliance with those obligations. 
Perhaps the most important item for our meeting tonight is a public discussion about the reopening plan for september, as it pertains to the plan. 
We hope to have answers to most of your questions as part of the presentation, but may also need time for the administration to research, an issue on occasion. 
You can always email the superintendent with the question as well. 
I am also aware that some attendees may wish to speak about matters related to conversations that occurred on social media and the role of the board of education. 
In that regard, if you wish to speak, please be sure to fill out a card and give it to the district clerk. 
There will be two opportunities for public to speak at this meeting. 
The first is limited to comments relating to agenda items only. 
We will then move through the agenda after we complete the agenda items. 
A second opportunity for public comment about non-agenda items will be provided. 
I ask that all present please be reminded to be respectful of one another. 
The administration and the board. 
Also the opportunity for public comment is just that public comment. 
The board of education will not engage in debate or back and forth with the public during the period of public comment in an attempt to provide all who wish to speak an opportunity to do so. 
Our policy limits comments to three minutes. 
There may be people who wish to speak, who have been left outside due to space limitations. 
Please ask security station at the doors for a card and they will bring it in to the clerk again. 
While we respect the community and we always want to provide people with the opportunity to be heard if things devolve into personal insult or invective as the president, I will entertain a motion to adjourn the meeting. 
I thank you all in advance for your cooperation to start tonight's meeting. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe are going to make a presentation about our reentry plan. 
Sure miss florio. 
Could you fire up the cameras for us 
all right just give us a moment. 
While we wait for that and while we're doing that, I'd also like to apologize to those from watching from home, because, unfortunately, obviously from that distance you're not really going to be able to see our screen. 
So for that we're very sorry um. 
You know, unfortunately, the limitations of how many people are in the room you know have we been able to move it to an auditorium. 
We certainly would have done that um, but we're limited to a total of 50 people or 50 of a room's capacity. 
Whichever number is lower uh, so, unfortunately we're at that 50 capacity in this room this evening. 
This document, we're going to show tonight again is another evolving document. 
Back on the 31st, we placed the district's plan on the website, as required by state law. 
That plan had to talk about three different models for return, which it did since the plan was posted on the website. 
You may have seen additional commentary from our governor where he has since changed some of the parameters, such as offering additional opportunities for choice for family uh and or for staff. 
So we need to take those things into consideration um. 
So again, this document and the presentation you're going to see this evening is the most accurate as of now, but it by far is not completed uh at the conclusion of tonight's meeting in this presentation, you're going to get a copy of this presentation emailed to you through the school messenger system, it'll also be up on social media and it'll, be up on our website, you're, also going to receive an invitation to participate in a survey regarding choice. 
It's a follow-up to the survey that we sent out last week, where we asked potential preferences, this one's going to need to be more definitive where we actually need to know which families are looking to have their children receive instruction at home versus those that are willing to send children to school uh. 
So without further ado, I'm going to ask miss heinz to start us off. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe. 
So this morning we actually concluded and had our last committee meeting, which culminated in the plan that we're going to be sharing with you tonight and, as mr o'keefe said, all of the community members will be receiving at eight o'clock a phone call to this manner and um also the plan and the survey for remote learning um. 
I just want to thank all of the folks that were on that committee with us. 
We are made up of several community members unit leaders, staff of all sorts, and it really has been a pleasure to work with everybody. 
Excuse me one second, while I got this on 
okay, 
so after a tremendous amount of feedback that we received from our survey from our community and given the lengthy documents that we have given out and the models over the past few months, I can happily say that we are able to offer a full return for our elementary students k-5, as well as a full return for our students with disabilities, our special class, which would be our 15-1 classes, our 12-1 classes and our 8-1 students, and at the secondary level due to size and the fact that, because we will need to reappropriate space at both levels, elementary and secondary, we will have to move forward with a hybrid model for grades six to twelve, and that will be an a b schedule based on alpha and household. 
The reason why we were able to uh offer a full return for our elementary school is because mr o'keefe and myself and our instructional directors and our director for facilities and the building principal began walk-throughs. 
Last week. 
We walked through each and every room in our buildings to space and measure at six feet. 
On the average we are able to fit about 17 students in a class. 
Now again, please know that we have scheduled a full return with our total population, so with any remote instruction that would diminish the amount of students coming into our schools, so we would actually have even more room because of the re appropriation of space we needed about one extra section or one extra grade level k5 at each building generally, so we are going to be utilizing space in our libraries in our arts and our music rooms and other common areas, which we'll talk about a little bit later on remote learning is something that, as you know, last week, it was confirmed that we will, as districts need to be offering this to our students as well. 
This will be a parent choice and a consent uh tonight at eight o'clock. 
Again, when you receive that plan, there will be a survey in there 
and we ask that only parents who are looking to remotely instruct their child fill out the survey, and it is due. 
It is a fast turnaround by friday. 
We need to be able to staff and schedule the remaining students that we have coming into our schools, remote learning again, 
that is by a parent's choice with consent and no at this time it is a decision for the entirety of the 2021 school year. 
I say this now because, based on the number of possible staff who may also look for accommodations, that might mean staff members staying home in conjunction with our students, we need to match up to see if we have enough staff members who are going to be able to offer remote instruction or should we have to look towards live streaming. 
If we do not have enough certificated staff that matches up with the number of students, and so therefore we would not have possibly a physical space for students to come back to. 
If that were the case, should, of course, all restrictions be lifted through the governor's office, then we would have to, and hopefully would have a little bit of time in between. 
We would just have to restructure and reschedule to ensure that all students are able to return remote instruction will entail. 
It is not like being in person school and it is not distance. 
Learning. 
Distance learning is only going to be offered. 
If, again, we are ordered by the governor's office to remain at home. 
All students and all staff remain at home, and that would be live instruction for two and a half hours on google me that would be k12. 
Remote learning is different. 
This is um, more asynchronous learning with possible, live or streaming teaching happening throughout the day. 
This would also be a schedule that would look a tad different based again on the number of students and how we would need to support everybody, but we just did want to be. 
You know fully upfront and present about that. 
We also know that devices for us 
we are not a one-to-one school district. 
We have definitely made some strides and we are in the middle of major infrastructure work that is going on. 
We just did order about a thousand new chromebooks in order to be able to disperse for families that do not have any technology in their home at all, but it would be difficult for us to provide a device for every student in their home 
should they be on remote learning. 
So that would be something that the family would also have to consider. 
Students will be expected to complete all assignments daily and any students, obviously with disabilities on remote learning, would be provided all of their accommodations as per iep. 
As for their iep 
okay 
um, it's important
, I'm sorry, it's important to just uh also talk about the secondary hybrid model for six to twelve. 
On your a day, let's just say um, you know, for the sake of just explaining it to everybody uh, it would be a combination on on a day. 
You would be in your child would run their traditional regular schedule. 
They would leave with homework and any work that would be on their google classroom for the next day that they are home, while the teacher is then teaching the other second half of the class on b. 
Obviously, our teachers are committed folks and they would be checking in answering any questions uh within that 24-hour period, but we would expect that at the secondary level, again, kids will be making sure that all of their assignments are completed and they are, and they are present. 
Attendance is important as we move forward in this school year. 
Okay, now that we shared with you a model of how we're looking to return our students
, I think it's very important that all families and community members now our staff knows about the health and safety measures that we are putting in place, and we continue to look to put more in place as as time goes on, masks will be required for all staff and students, both in school and on the bus. 
Remember that the bus is an extension of school, any students are having any difficulty wearing a mask for medical reasons or because of a disability will need to submit documentation. 
As always, they would affirm this with their building principle or through the office of student services. 
Mass breaks will be provided because remember in our classrooms. 
Our desks are six feet apart and in the regulations. 
Children do not have to wear a mask during instruction. 
We would encourage, of course, that masks be worn at all times, but that does give us the opportunity to give multiple mass breaks whenever a child does need it, while they're being instructed masks are to be worn, though, however, in the hallways cafeterias, if they're not eating recess any other common area that we would just want to be safe, um, we also every day um. 
Oh I'm, sorry excuse me. 
Uh bus travel will also include, as I said, before, social distancing practices optimally. 
We will be looking for six feet spacing and encouraging family members to sit together. 
Every day, parents and staff will be expected to fill out an online health screening survey and in this presentation, when you do receive it, you will see a hyperlink in there that you can see a sample of what it looks like ahead of time. 
We are also. 
We also took time to ensure that at arrival and dismissal, varied entrances in all of our buildings will be sanctioned off to separate grade levels. 
If they come off of the bus, we are also looking to uh take off the grade levels at increments of time off the bus. 
So everybody is not coming out at the same time so again, just looking to work ways to have plenty of flow while classmans may not look typical, especially at the younger levels. 
You may not see some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see. 
Please know that our classrooms will be warm and inviting like they always are, because their teachers will be there. 
Their principals will be there and we will still be able to decorate it. 
We will just not be able to decorate it with things that kids will be touching, because it would need to be sanitized every day. 
All classrooms will be devoid, as I said before, of any of those items that may collect germs. 
We are in the process right now, of setting up opportunities for our teachers to continue to clean out their their own personal items, and we are also moving out any unwanted furniture that we don't need in the room so that we can maximize 
the space hallways and other common spaces are being marked appropriately to ensure social, distancing, so markings on the floor items around on the walls and that's also shared later on in our presentation. 
So you will be able to see it at home as well. 
When you open up the link hand, sanitizer stations are located throughout each building, all along the hallways. 
We will also be having them at the elementary level or any other area for gym cafeteria time when, at the secondary level, they're able to go out so 
as children go in and out, they can use a hand sanitizer as they come into school. 
All of those uh. 
You know, welcoming areas would have a hand sanitizer station as well and at the elementary level. 
We would expect that the students, because we do have sinks in every room they would be washing their hands before and after snack and before and after lunch. 
Okay, so continued on. 
As I said earlier, we have reappropriated spaces at the elementary level and we are in the process of doing the same walkthroughs. 
Now in the secondary buildings. 
We know it's going to be very difficult, especially for the cafeterias to be utilized the way that they typically are, because children cannot sit in those tables together. 
So moving in some desks, uh looking at classroom use all of those different types of things, but really at the elementary level. 
We will be using again if we're going on full return for all students. 
Right now in elementary school, we would be looking to utilize our music space, our art space, and so therefore, those special areas become pushing for our students. 
We have worked with those departments and we'll continue to work to make sure that they have everything that they need for their lessons and equipment. 
Cleaning of all buildings will occur daily in the evenings in each classroom. 
We will also provide hand, sanitizer, wipes, gloves and any sort of spray bottles and wipe offs for for our staff and or students who feel encouraged to clean in between applicable filters have also been changed in our classroom events uh. 
We will also look to open up our windows and our doors where we can. 
Obviously you know the reverse was safety making sure that your doors were always locked. 
Your windows were always closed. 
Now, we're being encouraged by the department of health to please use fresh air when possible. 
So we will look to do that prior to it becoming too chilly up. 
Isolation areas have been identified in our buildings, and so, if a child uh is it has any sort of of symptoms 
or they come to school 
and they have not filled out the health screening. 
Those students would be placed there so that we can offer a temperature check and make sure that everything looks okay before we send them down to their classroom hygiene protocol visuals will exist in all buildings if they're not there. 
Already and again I share those with you at the end of our presentation so that you can see them. 
We will also be having routine hygiene drills much in the same of how we have regular school building drills at this time. 
Unfortunately, no visitors will be permitted in our schools. 
We just cannot provide enough secure measures for our staff and our students, and so again we will be limiting all visitors. 
Both traditional fire and hygiene. 
Drills will be conducted elementary snack and lunch will be in the classroom to minimize flow and secondary lunch. 
It may be in the cafeteria and alternately in the classrooms. 
We will also rotate any outdoor areas so for recess any of those other matters classes will be rotated on the game field, the basketball court, let's say, for example, and in our playgrounds students, are encouraged to bring their own water bottles. 
We do have bottle filling stations in all of our buildings. 
Our water fountains, unfortunately, will have to be closed at this time. 
Okay, so just some additional elementary return details that we wanted to share with you. 
You know it's always tough to start with health and safety, because again we don't want it to sound, like our students are returning to jail, but we do want to make sure that our students and our staff feel safe for the return. 
But please know that, on top of everything that we are doing, the social emotional well-being of our students is of the utmost importance to us, as well as of our staff, and we have surveyed students and we are looking to survey further the rest of our staff to just find out what are some of those underlying issues or concerns that people have. 
So we can ensure that we have our mental health staff there for supports. 
Unfortunately, we we will have to stress that students may not share materials. 
At this time, students will be assigned their own independent, math, workbooks and guided reading baggies will be provided weekly so that we have time to interchange them out clean them up and leave them for the weekend, so that uh there's a two to three day lag before the children pick up a new baggie and in those items we will integrate. 
As always in our literacy and our math, our science and social studies, topics whenever possible, this will be in addition to the strong direct instruction that our classroom teachers provide. 
Already all all students will be benchmarked for their ela and their math to identify their present learning levels. 
Curriculum will be retard as needed. 
We definitely know that this will need to occur for math, and we have provided some slides in the past that show you that we're fortunate we created our own math curriculum here 
a couple of years back 
and we know uh the the one to two units that each grade level will probably need to go back to so that, if I'm coming into second grade, I'm certainly not going to be able to start on my second grade. 
Math curriculum 
I'll need to be re-taught, some of the materials from when I was in first grade and for literacy. 
Once the teacher knows the collective levels of what they have in their room, they will be able to accommodate those literacy. 
Lessons around that art and music will be a push in again to minimize the flow, and we are currently working with our art, music departments. 
This is one that was a really tough hit. 
Music has to be 12 feet. 
Apart for any coral or any sort of wind instruments, we are working our hardest with that department. 
We are very fortunate here. 
We have a very strong music program and we do not want to see that diminish, 
and so we are looking for ways to think out of the box in order to be able to offer course opportunities that might be in smaller sections and different ways to offer lessons as well, but we have provided and are keeping all lesson areas in the elementary schools, so that students can still maintain lessons as needed. 
Physical education will be a mix of separating two classes. 
Typically, that are adjoined, so one class will be in the gym. 
One class will be outside and inclement weather they will rotate between the gym and in the classroom. 
Um, mr butel and miss mcentee have reworked their curriculum to ensure that all team sports will be done in the spring, so all of those units will be taught in the spring and in the beginning it will be more personal. 
Fitness. 
Traditional grading will also return for our students. 
While we know that there may be some interruption in terms of what model our students may have to face, where we hear rumors that we may have to go to distance learning sometime later in the fall. 
We fully believe that by using google classroom no matter what we will be able to make that seamless transition to distance learning should we need- 
and we are well prepared, as opposed to when the crisis first happened, and most school districts were really just grasping at straws, 
but we also know that the accountability is something that is very important to our students very important to our community and especially to our students who are at the high school level. 
As I said before, google classroom will be utilized for communication at both the building principle and classroom teacher level. 
We really want to make sure that parents are on one medium so that they can see any communication, email messages, lessons etc, and at this time we are going to enforce, to ensure for the safety of our staff and other students that any sort of instruction that is done on google classroom or virtually that our students adhere to our district code of conduct. 
When students this year sign on families sign on to look at schedules, they will be asked and prompted to sign off on certain measures around this 
okay. 
I just wanted to share with you some of our pictures that john 
and I took as we went around in our walkthroughs. 
These are some samples of our our elementary classrooms. 
Again, they're, not decorated, yet, of course, but you can see that we have removed a lot of the traditional. 
You know, wonderful items that we would see in a classroom, but again we really wanted to maximize space and ensure that the teacher had space in the front of where their smart boards are and then also making sure that kids had room and were not. 
You know pushed up too too much, so we still are adjusting that once every single classroom is created at the building level, we will be returning mr o'keefe and I, with our team, to just ensure that everybody has space both the teacher in the front of the room and then students around. 
So again, we are fortunate here. 
We do believe that we have enough staff to move forward and should the numbers for remote learning ensure even more flexibility. 
We may be able to open up more sections in our elementary schools and at our secondary levels, bringing back more secondary students uh. 
This is at one more of the elementary school and to the right there. 
You will see a classroom um at the secondary level. 
Um. 
This particular sample is where we marked it the a and b desks, so that students will be sitting 
and then it will make it a little bit easier for cleaning at night for our custodial staff. 
Okay. 
This is this is also a little bit of a tough share here, because I know that we've been getting a lot of questions about child care and upk. 
First, child care: we are still going to be providing am npm child care by boce by scope, educational services. 
They continue to offer right now child care throughout the pandemic for our essential workers, and they are happy to move forward to offer this services for all of our students. 
At this point, though, we are on hold for our upk program, and that is not because we don't have the space or 
we don't want to, but we simply have not received the allocations yet from the state, and that is how we are able to run our our upk program. 
While we do have many students who do a tuition based into the program, it is simply not enough to substantiate the program. 
Should we not get the allocations, so we are advising parents at this time. 
I know I've. 
I've answered many phone calls many emails if you are need, if you need care, if you would like your child to go to an alternate preschool now is the time to seek that out just to be safe. 
However, if we were to find out about the allocations tomorrow, we would also be able to implement that uh. 
You know moving forward
, so we have not changed anything we're not changing any spaces at this time, um we're just kind of on a standstill but to be safe. 
We just encourage you to look just in case. 
Excuse me, ms hines, yes 
yeah. 
Actually, since we last spoke earlier today, I spoke to mr duffy uh, he's the executive director of scope and runs our upk program just trying to see if he's heard anything further about the program 
uh and he has not heard much more than we have. 
As a matter of fact, there was a meeting earlier in the day with the suffolk county, superintendents uh, as well as mr wix who's, the regional superintendent for eastern suffolk boces, to see what boces knew about upk funding and again their contacts in albany have been very, very quiet on it. 
The only information they've received is, you know, floating a balloon from albany that they're considering opening upk up, but they may only fund it at 80 percent of what the grant would be. 
So that would mean if the district wanted to move forward. 
That would be an expense that was not budgeted for and we'd have to make a determination. 
You know to take those monies from elsewhere to support the program, so it sounds like they're getting closer to a final decision um, but I'd have to keep the border prize, so it might be a model in which we'd have to support 20 of the program to make it move forward. 
So I'll keep you posted on that. 
Thank you, mr 
o'keefe, um, 
okay and then on to now our boces cte program. 
So those are our students because we do have two. 
We have cte programs that we house ourselves. 
They will still remain on the a b schedule, but the but the bose cte programs, where students get on the bus and go to boces. 
Boces did alert us last week that they will be providing that in uh house they do have the room 
so that will be live every day and for those students 
we will still have busing from our high schools to and from the program. 
We at this time, though, say that we may need family support in terms of if your child might need a ride to school if they are going to the program in the afternoon or alternately. 
That is, that is not solidified. 
Mr o'keefe and mr savone are looking at that through transportation to see if we might be able to accommodate and pick up individual students at their homes. 
That would only be for those choosing remote learning right. 
Only those choosing remotely. 
Thank you, okay, uh. 
So here I just. 
I share the hyperlinks that you will see on um on the presentation that that we've sent home uh for the sake of time, I'm not going to go through all of these links, but the top is a sample of our health screening form and the bottom of our all the protocol visuals a sample of them that we have smattered around every single building and so for our next steps. 
As we said this morning, we finished our planning committee meeting where we laid out the the final steps here with our district leaders and our volunteers. 
Our board of education, pres presentation is, is now as you can see, and then we also have a live community forum on monday at seven o'clock and we will be uh live streaming it. 
Similarly here, however, I would envision that we would be a little closer that so that you can see us a little bit more clear um, but on friday we will be sending out a survey just asking community members for questions that they have. 
We will collate those into subject areas and we will look to our best answer. 
Any questions that you have as well as our building administration will be delivering a common q, a sort of like fact sheet about further details pertaining to to the buildings, and this will include sample schedules for all of our students- orientations how those will go out for our grade six on our grade nine. 
Some of that will be virtual and some of that will still be activities just broken up into smaller increments at the building, as well as arrival and dismissal times and bell schedules for secondary students and then, lastly, as governor cuomo had ordered on friday, we are in the process of updating our district website for protocols for any symptomatic individuals testing. 
We are not responsible per se for testing ourselves, but we are responsible for offering a plan. 
Should a student or a staff member go home, they are required to go, get testing where that could occur, and then, of course, they can't come back into school until testing results have been provided and then contact tracing as well. 
Okay. 
So that is the end of our presentation this evening. 
We look forward to speaking and sharing some more and clarifying more for you, as the rest of the night goes on and then on monday, as well at seven o'clock. 
Did 
I oh my apologies. 
Let me go back. 
I 
I didn't realize that I think I got caught up in what we were saying about upk before um, so my apologies. 
These are some additional details about our secondary return and again uh, with the utmost priority being the social and emotional well-being of our students. 
In grades. 
Six to eight we will be benchmarking for eli. 
We do that through a literacy management system that we have and also for math. 
All of our math departments have benchmarking type assessments that they do in the beginning of the year and again this will be to identify present learning levels in grades, seven to 12 curriculum adjustments may be made for applicable areas where prior learning needs to be had so, for example, in our math and our science classes, there may need to be some learning from the prior year's regents bearing class, and so we would be looking to look at curriculum around that and possibly offer review classes for our students as well again, traditional grading will return. 
Students may not share, so we will be limiting textbook use 
and we'll be taking advantage of all of the online subscriptions that we have physical education again. 
Very much like elementary school will be a mix of the gym outside fields and other large area 
use instrumental lessons very similar to elementary. 
We are working with that department to ensure that lessons will occur. 
They do need to be 12 feet if they are wind and or choral in nature, and again we will be looking to figure out ways in order to still offer those choral groups, but in a modified version google classroom will continue to be utilized for communication with both the principal and the classroom teacher again for a seamless transition should we ever be ordered into distance learning. 
Lockers will mostly be used for am and pickup 
only that's not to say that if a student really needed to go back, we would not allow them to, but again just trying to minimize the flow and minimize how much our students are putting into the lockers. 
So we would envision some form of outerwear
, that's appropriate for that time and uh modified or or very 
um. 
You know slight binders and or folders notebooks that they need um stagger grades again in times of at the end of the period. 
We would be announcing uh grades so that they can come out into the hallways, so that would mean that we would be um at the end of the period starting it a little bit earlier, so that we can allow each grade level to disperse into the hallway to their next period. 
Okay, sorry about that um. 
So that still is the end of our presentation um. 
We hope that this did clarify some further information for you. 
We are appreciative of the support and the time that the community offered us to be able to digest everything and wait for the orders, so we can bring this to you tonight. 
Thank you. 
Questions from the board questions from the board. 
Is anybody, jim, a john on the upk uh right now? 
The way that's funded is uh. 
Correct me. 
If I'm wrong, like a six hundred thousand dollar grant, primarily we get a six hundred thousand dollar grant. 
We hold a lottery that allots 252 families a spot in the program we have more interest than that annually, but families beyond the 253 are able to participate for the same rate, which is about twenty four hundred dollars per family for the year 
okay. 
So if, if the governor uh would give us 80 percent of that, that would mean that the district would have to come up with a hundred and twenty thousand dollars correct. 
But are you in that hundred twenty thousand dollars? 
Are we counting that that the lottery people are not paying tuition? 
That would still be the lottery people not paying right, so, in other words, the 120 000 could be reduced if the lottery people were willing to pay a tuition fee. 
Yes, that was a model the board chose to go with. 
Yes, okay, thank you just to figure back on what security was saying if they were to um to to uh. 
Take twenty percent of that uh we'd be looking at about 479 thousand. 
Two hundred is what we'll be looking at, which is what accommodate 201 kids. 
You were saying that you were concerned that we, we might not be able to raise the funds to be able to. 
You know, manage the program and have enough you know what 
yeah 
I mean. 
You'd have to redo the lottery. 
Then I I wouldn't I don't know. 
If would necessity, would you want to use the same number then cut it off? 
Well, I set off at just 201 
and then and then open it up at 237.69 per per family per month. 
We could examine any model that the board wanted to take a look at 
yeah. 
Certainly those other families had already been notified that they were among the families chosen for the free program. 
That's the worst. 
The worst case scenario would be correct, but let's say they take all the funding and, and they don't and one of the concerns to have it 
I mean have we thought about reaching out to some of our state elected officials, flanagan or uh doug smith, to find out if they can get us clarification from the governor's office as to whether or not he's going to fight 
yeah
, we can certainly continue to reach out. 
Quite honestly, during much of this crisis, much of them have been rather silent. 
We haven't been able to get a lot of information. 
The governor isn't sharing much with other people other than when he decides to put it out via press conference, I mean. 
Normally, our local representatives are very helpful in getting information for us. 
Unfortunately, hadn't been able to get information for us, but it's certainly worth trying. 
I mean we're two weeks before the start of school 
and you've got 252 families, not knowing whether or not they have a 
pre-k yeah. 
I mean I don't know, you know how the board feels, but 
I personally think that you would get 252 families, even if they took all 599 000, because at 237 a month for half day pre-k, it's still a great great opportunity sure- 
and I can't and now more than ever and and would be willing to work with us if there was zero funding 
and we had enough participation to still run the program. 
Yes would can we include something like that in the survey sits some of the families out there to see what the interests would be. 
We could do a separate survey. 
I wouldn't want to you know not on the same survey. 
Yeah put it out as a separate survey, specifically targeted to those families that are already in the process. 
I have a follow-up to that. 
Where are we putting all these students if our classes are maxed out at this time we still have not reappropriated those classes. 
We do have a couple of buildings because of additional special education sections that we needed, that we moved the classes, but we have not taken away those class spaces. 
Yet so, if we were to go with the will of the board to you know, put out a survey and go with a tuition base, we would be you know all set to go: hi hi uh. 
I just had a quick question um about the bus and what is the busing going to look like I mean again
, it'll also depend on participation. 
You know we put out a survey to the parents uh a week or so ago. 
I think we had nine thousand respondents in in very brief order. 
Um in that survey about a third of the families uh considered, possibly keeping their children home um of the two-thirds willing to send their children in 65 of those said they would use the bus. 
The other 35 said they would drive their children to school um. 
So just some quick, math you're only looking at say, 4 500, 
kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers. 
I mean they could change when we put out the new survey um, and it could be that you know parents first stop that they don't want to use the bus and then during the year. 
Maybe they start. 
You know they need the bus um. 
So we're not reducing the number of bus runs. 
All the runs that have been budgeted for would be running um, but with those numbers you'd end up literally with just about one child per seat. 
You know so 
and then you also take into account 
remote 
yeah 
you'll get routed for 44 students. 
So in the worst case scenario there could be two pupils in each seat, but based on the information we're receiving, I don't think there'll be that participation. 
Okay, just um some clarification so with the custodial staff cleaning each night, so 
they're going to have more to do than they did prior. 
Have we increased the custodial staff since their job description will be different to do a more deeper cleaning every day daily versus 
yeah. 
Unfortunately, that was one of the items that was pulled back on the budget, so obviously we may need to take a look at that again we were rating 10 custodians uh and then, 
when there was issues where we even today, we still don't know what our state funding is um and we still have the potential of a looming. 
20 percent cut 
um, we decided um. 
If you remember back to january and february, we were talking about this. 
We were adding one extra custodian, each building right um. 
That was one of our enhancements for this year's budget. 
We did draw that back um, so we're going to work with the staff. 
We have work with the substitute staff we have, and you know man it as best as possible to optimize cleaning, 
okay 
and then um with the uh secondary schools, where you have the a b desks next to each other. 
So that means, if I am an a student and I sit in only the a 
and then the next day, the b desk comes in. 
That image might change, though I was going to say that that was really more so that we can show a visual to the families, how we were spacing it out in the beginning, 
those desks we would see needing to be reappropriated and put into our our lunchrooms different other areas where we're going to need to reappropriate other space, the library different items like that um. 
So I don't. 
I don't necessarily think we were just at north today and in the classrooms that we walked around in with miss trombetta. 
There was only about 15 to 16 desks in in each classroom: 
okay 
yeah. 
That was an initial setup when we were trying to figure out what it would look like or how we could divide them up. 
But in fact, with the style of cafeteria tables, we have it. 
It really prohibits the number of children that can eat in the cafeteria. 
We believe we're going to take all the cafeteria tables out of those secondary cafeterias and store them and put in desks. 
I mean it's not going to be the most attractive. 
Lunchroom it'll be set up more like a testing room where children will be spaced six feet apart right with classroom desks correct, but we do anticipate that we would be able to offer breaks, for you know, students to be able to go outside and go into any of the recreation areas, 
items like that elimination and so then um in the secondary schools. 
If the kids are um changing classrooms um will the desk get wiped down between each change or how does that work in the cafeteria? 
Yes, yes, okay, not in the classrooms that would that would technically be not possible. 
I mean there's 3 000 desks in high school and 1600 or so in in a middle school. 
That just wouldn't be the means in that four or five minutes of passing to wipe down those tables. 
But if we student would want to do their own destiny, the materials will be in the classroom right. 
We are providing that for every classroom. 
Okay 
and then one last question. 
Sorry, everybody! 
It's okay! 
If a staff or a student happens to test positive, that would then be reported, and then the cdc would guide us on what we had to do like or we have our own plan. 
How does that work? 
The department of health, the department of health department of health? 
So they would tell us like so if it's one student in one classroom 
right that may be different than a student in a middle school who passes through a hall or mrs clayton's, become an expert on the matter. 
Okay, so the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require us to make reports for certain things and they require the medical treatment provider. 
The doctor who's performed the diagnosis for a positive result to report information to reporting for contact tracing. 
So therefore, our obligation we go above and beyond to make sure that, even if, for some reason, the medical treatment provider has not contacted the contact tracing, we will just check you know belt and suspenders that we have provided some insight in case 
there's an instance. 
The other thing is when the lab results come back. 
The lab results are um supposed to be also provided to the contact tracing, at which point the department of health would be uh or enter cdc would be contacting tracers and determining who they would contact, including students or staff or family or whoever they came into contact with. 
Can I can I pick you back on that question quick? 
Yes, thank you very much so on the checklist that we do daily. 
Let's just say rob 
and I are in a classroom 
and I find out that he test positive for covid the next day when my parents are filling out the check sheet and it says, have you come in contact with anybody? 
That's tested positive? 
Will that prevent my entrance into the building? 
If you're saying you tested positive 
yeah, 
if you're saying you're tested right? 
No, I mean, like I'm, not gonna, tell you that rob testifies we're not allowed to tell you 
I mean I came to learn it. 
It becomes common knowledge of who it was 
yeah, 
and now I have to honestly fill out the sheet 
yeah 
I mean I'm have to now have to say. 
Yes, I did come into contact with some of the department of health guidelines for close contact, and this is where it gets a little squirrelly because you know, are we in close contact? 
Are we in close contact? 
Their criteria for close contact is less than six feet for 15 minutes or more um, so we'll have to look at each of those one at a time, and I can foresee the department of health as soon as schools open, you know, becoming overwhelmed with calls from districts all around the state um just trying to get feedback and answers, so we're building criteria and protocols with our nursing staff with our personnel staff. 
You know, so we can make some of these decisions on our own. 
We have handled situations already, even during summer school programs. 
So it's not that we're unfamiliar with how to do it. 
We've had staff members with with covid um, so it's just going to be on a bigger scale. 
Now, that's all, and also just to mention, mr block is with us this evening from ingram and smith. 
He has been our one of our main contacts that we've been triaging information between the state, the federal, what we have in our schools, what we can do and what we can't do and trying to find the best scenario for our students and our staff 
and we'll continue to do so, and I promise this is my last question. 
So if a parent chooses the remote learning, yes, they have to commit to that for the year. 
They can't change their mind like after the first marking period, they're committing to that 
and then their student um cannot participate in, let's say spring sports, no, so um, I think in in the beginning of the guidance, it said that students may not be able to may not be able to um enter into activities or sports. 
We know now that that is not the case and that if a child is remote, they're still a student of ours, we're not really going to have any activities. 
So we don't foresee that being an issue. 
So it's really more for sports, but miss trombetta who sits on uh. 
The community. 
Four section has shared with us um information in terms of how they're looking at that language and how we would not be prohibited most likely from keeping children back from sports in september, and then the child plays a spring sport and then come the spring. 
Sports are up and running and you tell the child they can't play, and please just know that when we write that we're looking to make it more of a commitment that could be up to a year. 
That is because we don't want to give the misnomer that if a child says well, I want you know a family to say that they want to be remote in a week 
and then they change their mind. 
They want to do it another week. 
We will look at each case, but it would be very challenging for us to bring back large numbers of students who think who feel they might have made a poor choice, because that would shift all of our classrooms and all of our teaching staff. 
No, I would totally agree with that. 
I just didn't know if it would be like after every marking period reevaluated, but if the parent does commit, I just don't want to hurt the student of course by saying. 
If um extracurricular comes back in spring, your parent made this choice in september, and now you can't participate right and- 
and I think for us, you know being just uh of mine- that things could shift very easily. 
We could look to look at that come january 
and it may not need to be a year-long commitment, but we did want to write it down so that parents were aware all right. 
Thank you very much. 
Thank you for sharing this with us 
yeah. 
I have two questions or concerns um. 
When this plan was developed to return to school k through five the ada b day, it wasn't based on surveys that went out as to the number of parents that think they would choose remote or not choose remote. 
It was based on our entire population. 
Yes, so conceivably, if we have a um, a 6 through 12 model of a day b day, hypothetically every parent said, I want my kids to return to school. 
We can. 
We can accommodate all of them in an ajb day. 
You mean physically back into school. 
No, we wouldn't be able to do that. 
How would we physically bring them all back? 
We don't have so at the elementary level, just very simple, math right. 
We have to take out about five to six, seven kids out of each classroom in order to be able to accommodate that average size. 
My question a little bit on the six through twelve model- uh-huh
, okay, it that was based upon returning every single child to school. 
So if friday, the survey is if we have if we have more children now I understand you. 
Thank you. 
So if we have more children who are going to be on remote, we could conceivably- 
and I know we discussed this this morning in our committee- 
we could look to bring back more uh students. 
My question is that my concern is the same as laura is having a one-year commitment. 
I received a half a dozen phone calls today, um, probably in the last couple hours about I'm concerned about the one-year commitment we know. 
Okay, that you know in remote learning it says remote instruction is not equivalent to in-person hybrid instruction right
, so it's not the same level right so for forcing kids out of school. 
What we're doing is we're creating a bigger educational gap for the following year. 
Well, we're not forcing that would be a parent's choice, but 
the thing is we allow them to come back after each quarter. 
Okay, if we're able to accommodate them according to the way the plan was designed. 
Why wouldn't we allow them come back after after one quarter, so they can get that? 
I didn't think we said that we wouldn't be allowing we said that it would be really prohibitive for us to be able to reschedule them back into classrooms, but we could look at it based on the numbers that we have. 
We wanted to be honest, mr scavo, and let families know that this could be a year-long commitment, and most districts are looking at that at either january or the year long, because it is very disruptive that would mean having to up just move around the entire schedule for um. 
You know our schools, which we may still have to do, should covert restrictions be lifted, but you wouldn't want to recant, and we know that that happened quite a bit where, in the beginning of all this debacle, we were putting out information 
and then something you know, alternatively, was shared, but I think we just said before with miss slattery, that, of course, if we could look at it by quarter and we felt like it wasn't going to be a tremendous feat for our families that we would do that. 
But I think that that's not probably what a parent is going to make their choice on if I'm choosing to be remote. 
It's because I'm thinking that it's unsafe for my child to be at school. 
So I'm hoping that by these presentation, slides that we have 
people will see that we've made tremendous tremendous um. 
You know strides in making sure that our schools are safe, they're, clean and we're doing routine protocols to ensure that, but the commitment is a year. 
That's what this time for right! 
Now! 
Yes, so if something changes at home uh a person, that's furloughed now has to go back to work right, they want to and their their impression is going to be that they can't return because they signed the paper saying that they have a one-year commitment to be at 
yeah. 
But I mean I think, though um if, if there's something along those lines- 
and we all get those calls all the time, if there's a family, that really is in enough need and feels like they made the poor choice or not a poor choice. 
They made the wrong choice for what their their thing is. 
Going on right now, so whether a parent goes back, furloughed or their child is just not doing well in remote learning and they were to contact us just like any other parent phone call that we would have. 
Of course, we would look at every case individually, but I'm talking as a whole. 
We could not say you're going to be a remote 
and then, if you choose to decide in masses that you want to come back, we just would not be able to run the same schedule 
and then we would be restarting everything over again. 
The reason why I bring this up is: I watched the the newsday webinar yesterday 
uh we had dr johnson. 
I finally heard all about him. 
I got a chance to see him in the presentation, along with a psychiatrist along with a the superintendent of north babylon, and that exact question came up right and a lot of the experts were saying. 
I would not go past a semester. 
In fact, a lot of districts are going quarterly, you know- 
and I just don't. 
I just don't want to influence a person's decision because they're fearful that, if they sign that paper they're not going to be able to come back because the reality of it is
, is that you know when we look at the education of even a day b day. 
My concern is that, as a teacher, you can't teach the entire curriculum and now we're talking about prior learning being re-taught from the previous year, how you and you're never going to be able to teach the the entire curriculum, but the kids that at home that are not getting the same. 
Equivalency of education are going to be further behind the following year and which all we're going to do is create a a snowball effect and that's my concern. 
I mean you know I personally would like you know the opportunity that, if they, if they come back after, if they're the first quarter, which is a 10-week period or nine-week period, I think it would be a little more settling for the people in the community um. 
Knowing that all right, this remote's not learning I committed to a year now, I'm stuck well
, I mean, I think I think two things right, because I agree with you. 
I don't think anybody wants to be in the position where we can't welcome back students interchangeably as they need, and we definitely know that, no matter what happens. 
Curriculum is going to be interrupted this year. 
That is a safe bet right, but if we play, if it's the will of the board, if it's the will of the board to change that- 
and you would like to make that language more flexible, we're happy to do that. 
But please know that we've taken, you know quite a concealed amount of time to making sure we would prefer our students not to be on remote, 
but if a family really chooses and needs to choose that we honor and we respect that absolutely um. 
But yes, I mean nobody wants to do that, but nobody's the size of sagem either, and so we have different restrictions. 
That's why the question was the plan design based on the entire um it was. 
It was based on of if all students were going to be a full return, then we would have to go in an a b day if we are finding, though, that we have remote students at a quantity where we can bring back students even an additional day or or by grade level seniors. 
First, ninth graders. 
First, you know. 
However, we look to plan through that. 
Then that's would be our next step. 
So just like what we were saying earlier in our remote instruction um, it's going to be hard to match up what exactly the model will look like until we have the survey results from our teachers and for our families, so we can match it up certification-wise. 
My biggest concern is we have kids taking ap exams and getting those kids ready for that and getting those kids ready for the next level college 
yeah. 
You know we. 
We have training as much face time with with staff. 
It's absolutely. 
I agree with you 
and I'm very 
I'm very thankful uh. 
You know working with the scta if we ever have to think about distance learning the fact that we'll be providing two and a half hours every day for our students so running the same schedule, just shortened periods. 
You know working on google classroom interchangeably now and consistently across all of our classrooms. 
You know just right now. 
Currently we have a tremendous amount of teachers that are undergoing pd, virtually to ensure that everything is is up and running and that they feel clarified and supported in that kind of work, but you're preaching to the choir. 
I couldn't agree with you more that this is a really challenging time. 
I have a high schooler myself 
and she's in a smaller district, doing an a b schedule um. 
So I scratch my head a lot right now, so 
I I completely respect and understand and if the board would like us to look at the year-long date, please just let us know 
and we'd be happy to accommodate. 
No, this this will go the uh, remote learning actually just went out. 
That survey just went out, but we can I mean I could send it on on. 
On remind in five minutes, if we wanted to say you know that we've changed the date um, but it sounds like. 
Maybe that needs to be more of a discussion if we're looking to go that route meredith engine and then jimmy so on the remote learning. 
If a parent were to choose that model um, I understand that we would want them to commit for the full year, because we are devoting staff just to that remote learning right 
we're not using a teacher who may be inside the classroom, sometimes we're going to utilize the staff that, for whatever reason, has to be staying at home to be our remote teachers. 
That's the optimal plan right, so at the elementary level um, it works a little bit easier in that in that fashion. 
If I'm an elementary teacher and I'm out, I can conceivably teach any of those grade levels 
if I'm a librarian, obviously that certification, et cetera et cetera, it gets a little trickier at the secondary level, because if I'm a chemistry, teacher 
and 
and I'm out- 
and maybe I don't have as many students out for chemistry- 
you know- 
then what am I giving to that teacher in terms of work that they would be doing for that day. 
So one could say that she would switch what they're doing 
and now they're going to teach more science electives and they can support any of those students who are out needing science electives. 
So it's really going to boil down to looking at the hard numbers of students matched up with the teachers that we have. 
Should we not be able to match everybody up which 
I'm hopeful we will be able to, then we would need to start entering into some sort of live streaming or larger groups of google classrooms, where a teacher, instead of having a class of maybe 25 or 26 in a google classroom, we may have to have larger numbers, and 
so then that's why the year-long decision, or not doing it every quarter becomes very challenging for us. 
If I'm a teacher 
and I'm running a google classroom of 45 kids and 
now some that those classrooms want to go back
, what classroom are they going into? 
Where am I fitting them into 
so then you're having to change people's schedule? 
It's a lot of moving parts, it is and then, if um, so we have 
so children are able to through their parents, choose whether they want to come back to school or not. 
Our teachers are not electing whether they're coming back to school. 
The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning are the teachers that have um reasons why they cannot return, and so, even if tomorrow, you know three weeks after school started, all of our remote learners said well. 
This is for the birds. 
I don't like this. 
I want to go back to school. 
We wouldn't then have the ability to bring them back, because, even though we did the classrooms for them, we wouldn't at that point, have the ability. 
Would we well not at this time, because again, with six feet, we are, you know down to the amount of numbers that we have, 
but if, if our numbers look as such, where um the remote learning is um a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms, let's say, for example, instead of them being 17, that might only be 13 or 14. 
So then we could start welcoming them back, but that would be based on almost you know, looking at each student individually and being able to see how we can schedule them back into school, which is probably a very physical impossibility in the next three weeks. 
It's a little hard 
yeah 
um with our secondary schools um as a as a secondary mom. 
It is it it kind of does stink 
and there's no two ways about it: our children, no child, is going to get the best education this year. 
It's just not going to happen and something we're going to try our best 
yeah 
we'll. 
Definitely try our best right um. 
If one, let's say somerset had an influx of you know. 
80 percent of their kids wanted to stay home and remote learn that would open up a lot more room, but it wouldn't necessarily mean that we would do somerset where their children win every single day and the rest of them. 
No, we would be making decisions that are consistent for all students, but then we might be reappropriating staff to help out in um other ways in other areas, and I don't want to put you on the spot, but it's okay. 
That's why we're here 
we're on the spot? 
Have we looked into sixth grade at all, because in my opinion sixth grade is that lost grade? 
It's a grade where they're a little too young to still stay home by themselves and not only just stay home for the day by themselves, but also teach themselves kind of you know get on 
this get on the schedule 
get on the computer. 
Do what you got to do? 
Keep yourself moving on that b day. 
Have we visited something that once we get all our numbers, because I know we can't really finalize anything until we get all these surveys and numbers, but once we get all those numbers, are we going to be able to maybe look at sixth grade going every day as a possibility? 
Yeah, that's absolutely you know
, that's definitely a conversation that we've been having as as soon as we know what the numbers are. 
Will we be able to welcome back additional grades, and I would I would assume that we would be having these conversations with with all of you, our administrative team, obviously as well um and sixth grade is one of those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off at um, because we know that they could be 10 11 years old going into school, and I would not feel comfortable myself at times, leaving my child home for long periods, um, and so yes, we've had those conversations and once we know the numbers we'll be able to come back and report if we're able to make any changes good. 
Thank you. 
So much, no problem, just a quick question. 
Some clarification! 
Yes, um piggybacking a little bit on what mr scavo said. 
Are we entering the year making an assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver 100 of content in regards to secondary curriculum? 
If that is the assumption that I think you said that we're almost entering into um, 
I mean who's going to choose what topics and what's being covered. 
Are we letting different teachers different people it just it concerns me that we're entering, 
I know, there's no perfect answer and there's no scenario that can right that, under these uh circumstances that you've, given you 
but um. 
I guess that makes more of mr scala's point is that if we're making the assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver content, we should be trying to uh wait till so many surveys come back and see how many kids we can actually get yeah 
and um. 
So no right, I don't have a perfect answer for it, but I can tell you what we're doing to set up for that um. 
I had a chair meeting a couple of weeks ago, so our instructional leaders in each department to talk about that, especially at the secondary level, and so we would be looking at our curriculum at what are the big ideas at the end of the school year. 
What is it that the students are expected to learn so they can um. 
You know move forward and pass those classes and or regence exams, we're also hoping to have a little bit more guidance in terms of the state education department in terms of what they're going to do in relaxing standards and curriculum and testing so much in like how they had canceled the regents. 
We don't hope for that. 
We hope more for choice so that these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents. 
If they want to take it and see what kind of grade they get um, I don't, I don't think we're looking. 
I don't think- 
and I know 
you mean it this way, but we're not assuming we're not going to be able to get through our curriculum, but we want to be real with our families. 
The curriculum could look a little bit different than what it normally does, and I know our teachers again hard workers are already looking at that. 
We've had some conversation, for example around science lab hours, usually that's seat time 
now the state education department has relaxed that, and that could be also a virtual. 
So we've already started those conversations once we come back into. 
Schools in our department means that we've been having anyway, virtually we'll continue those talks and start looking at that together. 
So this at the secondary level state the new york state, creates the standards for apn regions 
right so haven't. 
Given us clarification, okay well, ap is through uh is through the college board, and so we actually are, starting, as you know, uh a new ap capstone program at the high school, so those teachers that um are gonna begin teaching it for us this year they just went through the training for that 
and right now, ap is holding tight to what they're doing, but we also know that at the last minute they made some changes around what they did: testing wise, virtually um. 
So we are advocating- 
and I think mr o'keefe spoke about this earlier- while we have not heard a tremendous amount from our legislators at this time we have been advocating, through our local boces, our associations talking to talking to the college board and just hoping for some teamwork for relief, so that families know that you know we're not looking to make any decisions that are going to make impacts for the students, but we also have to be real and they have to work with us. 
So we're hopeful for that. 
No problem, aaron, the so by the weekend we will have uh the figures on how many people are opting for remote learning. 
Is that, yes, all right and the way we have it now is uh they're being committed. 
They can make a commitment for one full year, uh just just for my identification. 
Let's suppose it came back to say 30 percent of our district, one, which could be right, which could be what it could be sure. 
What does that change? 
Anything uh for us with the ab days or or or as meredith said, the sixth grade situation would, let's say, 30 remote for the year. 
Would that change uh? 
You know what we're doing right now. 
Yes, absolutely so like what I just said with business. 
Also gonna take you know. 
Where is the thirty percent 
yeah? 
It could be heavily weighted on the younger children. 
Right, you know, is a k12 pet families deciding they want to keep them home right. 
You know it really depends on the breakdown of the of the groupings and the grades of where that 30 percent is or is it leaning more on one side of the district versus the other uh, it's not as clean as just if it was thirty percent, but yes, spaced across the district. 
That would make it easier. 
We can see some movement, I'm just not sure that I could say for sure right now that it would be at the secondary level. 
We would just need to see where it is and just aggregate that and just look at it, and it also boils down to to you know certification areas too, as well. 
How much staff we have in um in each area? 
I fully understand mr scala's position on that. 
I really do understand, but I'm trying to trying to look at this, as if you put out a survey tonight which is already gone, but if you put it out- 
and it said your one mocking period 
and you could change your mind, then kind of I would say that you really 
we're stuck with what we've got this is. 
This is the way it's got to be because you don't know from market period of marketing period, how many students you're going to have. 
Is that accurate? 
Well yeah 
I mean, 
but, but that goes to back to what we said. 
We can't put out there that you can make the decision after each quarter. 
If we're not sure we're going to be able to offer that- 
and so I know it may have looked like it- was a little bit stricter than it sounds like the board was- was willing to move forward with 
and so again we're certainly open to putting in alternate language, and we could send it as as quick as you know, as soon as we're done here or first thing in the morning. 
I certainly don't want to prohibit anybody from not doing remote learning 
but um again, it's it's. 
We have to be practical in the size of our school district, so we can't say we're going to be able to offer things that smaller school districts can right away, but it is prohibitive based on on the numbers. 
So, yes, we might be able to offer that and we might be able to offer more grades into our secondary schools. 
We might be able to offer more space for our elementary students. 
We just won't know until we see all of those numbers getting to getting that number that we're seeking this weekend will drive uh where we go next, yes, and that's why it's challenging to be able to share with our staff and 
with our community what remote learning will you know essentially look like as well? 
If I don't have enough staff, I can't guarantee that you're going to be in a google classroom with a live teacher. 
I might not be able to offer that it may be based on whatever elective or store or grade that you're in it could be some sort of like a live streaming, but 
but again it really. 
It depends on on the numbers of the students that we have uh up against our staff as well. 
Thank you, jim just just real fast to pick it back. 
I apologize. 
I walked out for a second, if only 75 of the families respond to the survey. 
So now there's 25 of the kids. 
We don't know what they're doing no the default is that they're coming to school. 
Okay, yeah! 
Thank you no problem, so 
I know with elementary the teachers. 
Usually take their lunch when the students have their lunch. 
How are we working that, if they're having a lunch in the classroom who will be supervising them so uh? 
We do have obviously aid support. 
We are also working with our principals because we know that we're probably going to need some additional help with that um, but we also um know that uh. 
You know that lunch is managed um. 
I actually thought that there was some staff that was a part of the lunch periods that might be mistaken. 
Yeah I'd have to look at that um, but we are. 
We are having conversation to ensure that we have um the support we need for lunch, two more. 
Actually. 
What will clubs look like virtually? 
So that's 
that's another new and exciting uh question right. 
We definitely know that clubs are not going to be able to be maintained after school physically. 
We have started to work with an online platform called passport for good and it allows clubs to run virtually and note on all their activities attendance community service hours if a child is working any of those types of hours. 
So we have to enter into conversation with our teachers about what that could look like. 
We certainly don't want to not offer clubs, but you know once a week twice a week: what sort of activities? 
How will you meet with them? 
Will google me be a part of it? 
Those are the questions that we're looking to have moving forward around clubs and one more with the staggered start times. 
Those are students still changing for gym class. 
We will not be changing for gym and we will not need to because we have moved team sports to the end and we're looking to do more um. 
You know personal fitness that isn't rigorous, but no we would not. 
We would not be looking to have any any uh. 
You know contact in that manner for our students 
[Music]. As I sat here tonight. 
I thought about saying absolutely nothing 
and I really don't know where to begin. 
I don't have a specific question. 
I can tell you that I'm incredibly angry internally right now 
uh and it's not at anybody in this room, but I thought that uh, I haven't organized my thoughts completely they're. 
Just bouncing around in my head, but I want to say a few things. 
First, I want to say that you did an outstanding job in the most difficult of circumstances. 
You've put together a plan. 
Every school district is in the same exact boat that we are in questions asked tonight by rob, alex laura meredith uh everybody here great questions, uh and we don't have the answers to any of those questions and we are going to be surprised. 
I think greatly by the things that we find. 
I think that you know people could look at what's going on here tonight and they may think that all of us agree on this model and think that this is what we have to do. 
I'm sure there are people watching this tonight streaming or 
we'll watch it later on 
and they'll think that if you're sitting here, I'm sitting here 
and I'm quiet that I must agree with this plan- 
and I think it's wonderful 
and I'm going to tell you that I do
n't it's rotten, it's a rotten plan. 
That's going to do tremendous damage to our children. 
I've been teaching for over 22 years. 
Now I can remember when I started there was goals 2000., maybe some people in the room. 
Remember that maybe you don't, then there was no child left behind and then most recently there was common core there's, never a time in which it seems like a bad idea, 
can't come about a bunch of garbage and nonsense that does anything but improves the education of our children. 
As I sat here tonight and I watch that slideshow 
and I watch those desks sitting so far apart. 
I thought what kind of dystopian period of time have we entered into where we look at this, and we accept this as the quote-unquote, what I hate to say the new normal, it's not normal to me. 
It's not acceptable to me. 
I want you to know that if it were up to me solely, I would defy the governor. 
I would send all of our children back to back to school. 
I would give them that opportunity. 
I believe that his edicts are completely unrealistic in terms of delivering a sound education to our children and I believe they are not well-based in terms of research and data and so on. 
So when we look at how many children have ended up with covid and what's happened to them, there's no question that covet exists. 
In my mind, I lost one friend to it. 
I almost lost a second several who had it very badly who thought they might lose their lives. 
So there's no question that covet exists. 
However, when I look at the numbers and when I look at children getting covered, what I see is that our response is disproportionate to what is going on and we are willing to just fall in line and listen to the leadership of this state, this country and do these things- 
and I know there are people who feel like me, and I know there are people who don't feel like me, a third of the survey respondents who have said I'm not comfortable sending my child to school, and I am all about parental choice. 
If you do not feel comfortable sending your child to school, then I encourage you not to I encourage you to homeschool. 
I encourage you to use the remote option if you're not comfortable with that. 
However, I feel, like I've, been denied my choice, which is to send my child to school. 
I'm willing to tolerate that risk based upon what I know, because I think that the damage being done to my child that still is in in school and the damage being done to other children is tremendous. 
I taught remotely for the last what three four months of school 
and when I tell you that I did as good of a job as anyone could do with live instruction every single day. 
All right. 
I worked very hard to do what I did and I watched kids slide into the great abyss and some of those children that I watched slide are supposed to go off. 
The princeton this fall are supposed to go to. 
Cornell are supposed to go to uh. 
You know you name the school 
and 
and they're going columbia 
and so on uh. 
But yet I've watched each one of them slip 
and I've watched a few hold on, 
and I've watched the most needy students that I taught completely slip
, we're not getting that back. 
We are not, and here we are and here's where we're going 
so I'll leave on this particular note. 
Sometimes it's real easy to just go along 
and I feel terrible for people like you, folks, the administration here
, it's simple and I'm in the same boat as an educator. 
It's my job! 
It's how I support my family and live my life and as a result of that, I'm forced to comply, because if I don't I'm out of a job but the solutions, we've come up with they're, not good solutions, they're, terrible solutions, and they are solutions that are going to harm each and every one of our children. 
And at some point I do believe that people who feel the way that I feel are going to have to think long and hard about how we stand up and demand what we want for our children that we think is best. 
I just want to say before I ask my last two questions that was well said bill. 
I I feel exactly the same. 
We do so well said um. 
I just want to talk about um the boces, because we're also feeling some questions today about boces um. 
As I mentioned earlier in the meeting community meeting where there was only 50 people in that meeting, um, where there was only 50 people, there was 50 how many people 50 volunteers 
and then all of our staff as well 
yeah go ahead. 
Um, you know. 
Having worked for boces for going into my 29th year, you know over the decades things change school districts go to block schedule. 
Kings park did at one point: um school districts for financial purposes, decided that you know we don't want to send two bus routes to boces. 
We only want to have one route and, as a result, okay, they basically said to our agency look whirly standing in the am this year, or will he sending seniors in the am and juniors in the pm and they've changed things so that it accommodated him and 
our bosses always accommodated him and my concern with some of the questions with some of the students that are in cte classes, that are that are scheduled to go to carpentry and auto body, and- 
and you know whatever other programs they signed up for- is that transportation becomes an issue if we have an a day b day, um those particular subject areas you have to be there every day you can't teach somebody how to sand the fender and paint it remotely. 
It's just not something that can happen, so I suggested earlier that maybe we should call boces, uh eastern south post and say look we pay anywhere from 14 to 20 000 tuition depending on the particular student. 
If they have an iep or not or if they need additional services um, we can only stand in the am because of the situation. 
We're in you know and get their feedback. 
You know, I don't believe we. 
I don't think they want to lose the tuition 
yeah. 
No, I agree and and uh- 
and you know I did appreciate that idea, because I'm not I 
I know you're in western 
but um it was just you know, shared with us, the model that they were running, 
and so we traditionally we're share 
we're told what our schedule is, but we are quite large and I agree with you- 
we pay an exorbitant amount of money into both season. 
It's certainly worth the conversation. 
The second thing we have in-house cte classes where we have cosmetology um, yes and- 
and you know using the same concept- 
I mean if we have to get uh our kids there every single day. 
The suggestion that you know we've we've done in you know boces is that we try to allocate you know: 
uh the junior students first year, students 
the am session this way they could take that bus up every single day right and just have to get a ride home two two days out of the week 
and then the pm students or the second year. 
Students would actually attend cosmetology and pm because many of them may have driver's license and license um. 
It's just another suggestion to be able to accommodate that population of kids. 
That really need to be there five days a week, especially cosmetology students that have licensing and all that stuff which, by the way our cosmetology teacher, I mean she. 
She really just went above and beyond to ensure that the kids had the experience they needed, even if it was virtually. 
So I agree with you 
and I do appreciate uh that feedback 
and then just the last thing is more of a more of a comment 
and it's frustrating because I I hear what bill saying I hear 
and if you don't mind, I really do uh. 
Mr coggins, I uh. 
I don't want you to think or anybody to think that we just you know, laid low because of our jobs. 
Um. 
I think everybody knows I came from a district where we stood very tall against things that were coming down from the state education department. 
I think when you're talking about health, it's a little bit challenging, but I hope you understand- 
and I hope everyone in the community knows that at no point did. 
I think that I was doing this just because it was my job 
but because I really do want what's best for children like. 
I know all of us here, but I stand just as equally frustrated when you're out and you see people out and about in playgrounds and beaches and and whatnot 
and we're held to you know very different standards. 
But when I tell you that we're working 18, 19 20 hours to make sure we're given the best, I know it's not what we all want, but I do respect what you said 
and I really do appreciate uh that feedback. 
My last thing is really more of a statement and um. 
You know when I look at the guidelines for opening in new york and 
it seems like they print a new one every week, because they change the rules so crazy, um. 
You know you look at them. 
If I can say that you know john, when you said it was cryptic, it really is 
I mean you need to you know you can interpret this 50 differently. 
Yes, yes, 
but they have a mandatory column and then recommendations for best practices, which I don't understand, but 
it talks about um ensure that social distancing, six feet uh at least six feet or a physical barrier is maintained between individuals while in school facilities on school grounds, including cafeterias, unless safety or care of activities such as moving equipment or elevating elevators traveling in common areas requires shorter distance of individuals. 
But then number two says: if social distancing is not possible, individuals must wear acceptable face governments yep
, that's exactly how we interpret what we talked about earlier if we have to move kids back into a classroom. 
The way I interpret this- and maybe legal legal counsel, give me you know 
their opinion right is that if we had to move desks closer together, okay to be able to not be able to, you know, uh accommodate the social distancing by putting masks on the kids, we would be able to do that 
and that's exactly how we started out our planning. 
If you remember we had looked at, I think it was the massachusetts model where we were looking to at least go no less than three feet 
and when we did that it was like everyone's high fiving each other everyone's coming back. 
This is great and I don't mean to put mr block on the spot, but we did receive guidance from legal and it looked as though that masks were not going to be appropriate alone, but we read the regulations the same as you. 
It was just as disappointing when we found out that was not to be mr o'keefe. 
The other day, um you'd mention that if we were able to go three feet, we could accommodate every student. 
Every kid come back. 
Every student we had every building make up a class for three feet, and so we were able to say that if parents felt safe for their children to return that we were able to do that our hands are very tied um. 
In terms of that, and you know again, I don't mean to put you on the spot, mr black, but you may want to jump in then 
it was a few weeks ago where you know we thought that just mask face covering was going to be sufficient. 
If you couldn't maintain the social distancing uh, but then the governor's office came out and clarified that and said that no you have to have that physical barrier and um. 
So that then took away our what we thought was our ability to have face masks, but the face coverings are okay in the hallways and the bus. 
Yes, well, yeah, there's! 
No! 
It's not that's! 
Yes, nothing makes sense, but that is uh. 
That's 
that's what we're following 
so aaron um. 
As we all know, I should have had a swivel chair, john I'm just saying. 
Should I have a swivel chair, as we all know, um education is is not going to be pretty this year 
um and we want to give our children as much as we can and we've spent so many years working on this educating the whole child and worrying about social, emotional. 
I'm, the most emotional person shouldn't be talking about this, 
but um. 
So a couple of things, our most vulnerable, social and emotional. 
As we see little children adapt much better. 
You see a two-year-old in target with a mask on it's, not a problem. 
Um, my teenagers find the mask, uncomfortable and, and so um hours. 
Six through 12, in my opinion, are our most mentally vulnerable 
and I just feel like um, because things are so different. 
Are they going to be able to just go down to the guidance counselor just go down to you know, or things like that like like, where they want to just go. 
Take five minutes with the guidance counselor or even the school psychologist. 
Is that still going to be fully in place opened to everyone? 
Is there also? 
I know that um. 
I know that over the the distance learning period last year that our sagem north um sel chairs they 
they did a tremendous job. 
Having a google meet also are are things for mental health in place 
and then my other question is what does recess look like in um in covid land in elementary um? 
I think yeah, 
because I think I lightly brushed over that. 
So I'm glad that you asked me about that because you know so last year was the big thing that we were taking away: 
five minutes from lunch and recess and uh see, there's always bigger fish to fry people um. 
So, with that they're gonna be allowed to go outside 
they're gonna be allowed to run it all off. 
Are they allowed to play on the play gyms? 
Are they allowed to play ball with one another, or is it you're going to stay there and just run in place 
and you're going to stay there and run in place 
and 
yeah? 
I mean, I think. 
Realistically they are children, we're going to do our best to set up so that it's a safe environment, but there's not going to be boredoms out there if they are playing ball. 
I can't tell you that we will they're going to be, as I said earlier, rotating between the fields that we have the playground equipment that we have and then the basketball courts, so we would obviously have equipment outside for that. 
We do have sanitizing stations that we will be utilizing for the students but again um. 
You know, as I said I think in the beginning. 
We do not want our students to come back feeling like we're in jail, and the first thing that we had on our slides was the social, emotional well-being of our students 
and I'm very proud of the program that we have built here, and we are just looking for unique ways whether it be virtual, more push in from our sel chairs. 
You know all project kindness, all of those things we'll still have them this year. 
They just may look a little bit different in terms of the mental health staff, ms graham and the office of student services. 
Now under the direction of mram better with ms graham, we will be deploying guidance counselor. 
All of those different all of those services are still in place, but we see ourselves doing more proactive lessons as students come in and more push in into our classrooms, so that students feel comfortable. 
We know the issues that we're seeing out there again. 
Our sel chairs have sent out a survey to our students at the secondary level, and I agree with you at the elementary level we're going to be doing more proactive, resiliency skill type of activities with them. 
Our health teachers for the past year have been building a health workbook for the elementary schools that are rooted in all the resiliency skills that we have been studying using the university of uh pennsylvania. 
So we're really excited about what we can deploy for our students, and you know it goes back to yes
, we are so worried about curriculum and we are we are. 
We are going to work to ensure that all big ideas as much as we possibly can until this is all over is taught, but our first charge is just making sure that those kids feel happy and safe and healthy coming in and our staff as well. 
Our staff has not only been teaching from home uh prior to the summer, but they also had their own issues that they may have been you know undergoing. 
So that is our number one goal here. 
Thank you no problem, mr keith. 
Mr science. 
Uh. 
One of the important questions that was asked this morning was about safety and about how kids are wearing their masks on the bus they're getting off the bus 
and now they're walking into the building with their masks on maybe a hood on
, maybe a hat on and 
they're not going to be as easily identifiable as they have in the past. 
One of the suggestions was to wear lanyards with maybe id cards. 
I'm just wondering what else. 
If there's any other suggestions, if there's, how are we gonna, I mean? 
Obviously health and safety is number one concern that that is a that is a major concern of not being able to recognize kids and especially, ninth graders, who are now new to the building. 
So we don't know any of them to begin with, and and sixth graders are now going in there right. 
So there's going to be a lot of unfamiliar faces and even more unfamiliar with me. 
Well, so not too unfamiliar only because we do have our transition meetings for all fifth graders going into the sixth grade and then all eighth graders going into the ninth grade, and we did those virtually over the past few months prior to the ending of school. 
So all teams at the high school level, in conjunction with their middle school and then middle school to elementary school. 
We met on every single student, not just some, but all so they were able to physically see a picture of the student talk about the student all of those things, so so we're hoping right that there are similar, uh some familiar faces coming in but, like we had talked about this morning, the use of the student badges. 
We have never truly enforced the way that we need to now, but we would have to ensure that the students are maintaining that and showing that because they will be wearing masks as they come in. 
However, we are also spacing things out, so the kids aren't coming into school in mass quantities, so should, in fact you know, prior to all the badges coming out. 
You need to slip down just so. 
We can kind of recognize you put back up and go back in. 
I think we would feel safe and comfortable in terms of that, but we'll be working with our staff working with security and seeing what other measures that we can um, you know put into place. 
John. 
I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that. 
Just to pick it back up. 
If we're going to have the kids wear their id cards just a matter of how fast can we get the idea? 
Yeah? 
That's the 
that's the only thing, 
and that's why I say in the beginning. 
We may just have to do the old-fashioned, put it down for a second, so I can see, but you know our staff is pretty astute and granted the ninth graders uh. 
We may not recognize them all, but we all you know. 
We know our students here so um, that's obviously another concern would be now we have them wearing their i
d cards 
and of course, we all know that 10 to 15 of the kids are either going to lose them or forget them. 
Do we have a mechanism to reprint them in the building daily so that everybody has one um? 
Thank you, okay, so just for the community, we we are able to duplicate that. 
Yes, thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss any other questions we moved on. 
I just wanted to make sure that we at least took a poll of where we stand. 
As on remote learning, did we want to take a poll and leave it at one full year of a commitment? 
Did we want to talk about a half year? 
Did we want to talk about a quarter? 
I think it's important that we do it now, so that we don't wait until last. 
Second 
and we're changing 
yes 
[
Music]. I understand what rob was saying before about this. 
I'm just curious why it wouldn't be sufficient if we just changed the language to where we could evaluate if it were possible and had people understand that it could potentially be that long, but we could, of course, if situations allow we can, we can, we can shorten it and truncate the time period. 
Can I just ask a question to mr block: 
I mean 
I just just because I can foresee 
I'm sorry jim just because I can foresee something are 
we are 
we even legally allowed to tell somebody they're not allowed to come back? 
That's 
you know, that's a 
that's an unanswered question. 
You know 
and it's unprecedented um from a legal standpoint, and 
you know I understand fully the operational issues from a legal standpoint. 
You're going to want to see more flexibility, because the concern is that family will say that being denied. 
My right education, it responds back, is no you're being educated, being educated remotely, but that's not the same type of education as an in-person education. 
So from a legal standpoint, I would recommend that there be some flexibility built in. 
I was actually going to state that if you were going to do that, um still keep the year uh, but have a reevaluation the ability to be able to re-evaluate, as ms heinz said, that that's going to occur on a student-by-student basis. 
Anyway, if there's a concern from a parent, but parents are maybe being a little bit um, not almost like misled, but don't not aware of the fact that there may be a re-evaluation, but that's something you may want to clarify, and you could do it in an interval period. 
You could do it. 
You know after the first quarter, 
yeah, 
that's as a re-evaluation, for example. 
Yeah 
I mean 
yeah. 
One of my concerns would be is that they realize what remote learning entails and they're like I. 
This is not what I signed up for we're not going live, we're not doing this or not right, and then we get an influx of kids and now class sizes grow and we don't have the space to have everybody in. 
So I just I want to make sure that we have that flexibility
, I'm sorry jim 
[
Music]. Well, my position is 
I like what bill just said. 
My position was to get the true figures. 
The way it went out was probably the right way to go, so people aren't saying. 
Well, I can experiment for a while and we never really get a true picture, but at the same time I think if you put it if the language was softened up to say, the possibility of a full year is real uh. 
However, you know there's going to be uh, independent cases that have changed, etc, etc. 
So we all know that we all know that this could all change, but to get the true figure up front. 
I think they have to be aware that this could be a full year of remote learning. 
Uh. 
Yes, that's just my opinion. 
Yeah 
and I apologize. 
I don't have the survey in front of me. 
I don't, 
I think I said could be, but I don't recall, but we could certainly again put that out once we see the numbers and 
if, in fact we feel like, maybe families felt a little bit um, it was too strong 
and they're, not really quite sure we can. 
We could send a call out. 
We could send out an email as quick as you know now, if we wanted to the reason why I asked that question is: is that we based that plan on every single student returning? 
Yes, we did so the issue is not space. 
The issue is scheduling. 
Yes, that's correct right! 
Yes, so I view it as well and and because of the six feet right, you know obviously space because of that, but the six feet parameters is what allowed us to go to this plane to accommodate every kid. 
They should be right. 
So if we don't have all if, if not all kids return, then we will have more space, obviously and then can bring back more kids. 
So so the thing is like I said: the issue is not the space matter. 
You know the plan was devised based upon every single student returning and that's why I suggested you know, maybe doing it 
once you know one or four times a year um. 
You know. 
For that reason, I understand that it could be a nightmare scheduling. 
Well if the restrictions aren't lifted, I guess we have 13 kids. 
In a seventh grade, honest math class and we're looking at a schedule, you're going to look at the section 
say all right put them in mrs smith's class or put them in yes correct. 
Yes, so you know the issue is that you have this. 
You have the space, it's just more of a scheduling thing, and I would imagine that if more and more kids come back from remote learning, we could reassign teachers to classrooms. 
Yes, well, and- 
and that's the point 
right so in a year where we're already saying the curriculum's interrupted the day has been corrupted. 
That's the only thing that we wanted to minimize in the beginning and get a true account, because you don't want to be moving teachers around and upheaving schedules, but we can of course always hand select and uh. 
You know put students in as outliers who really do need to come back, but we didn't want to forget. 
I don't know who said it before. 
We just didn't want people thinking, I'm going to try it out for a week 
and if I don't like it 
I'll, go because we're just. 
That would be really good. 
A quarter um you know, and that will give us enough time to do the planning and do the scheduling if we have, if we had to. 
I just think that the one year signing something this is one year, scaring heck out of people based upon the phone calls that I received today. 
So I guess we'll have to then decide. 
Are we doing flexibility? 
The flexible option, obviously is the best for everybody, but do we want to say one year or do we want to say by quarter, 
and I guess we'll vote on that. 
So if you want to do a full year, write it with flexibility, you can vote on that full year. 
Flexibility, yes, so just put we'll put our hands up 
and I'll 
just we'll count them all full year with flexibility or flexibility with re-evaluating every quarter. 
Okay, 
so yes, but maybe we could put what would be the best way to well 
yeah. 
I think that what I suggested would be if you want to stay with the full year, but that you re-evaluate on a quarterly basis 
yeah, 
because I just caution us to if we all of a sudden say flexibility, then people, you know 
I 
just we have to have a true account. 
School starts in two and a half weeks, and I I don't mean to be crafts about that, but we we really do, 
and so I think, mr black, the way that you had said it um. 
I think you know it's a year, but we would be reevaluating it throughout the year for everybody. 
I 
I 
I like what he said. 
Does that mean? 
No? 
I don't think that you're going to make that full commitment. 
I don't think you can quite frankly 
yeah. 
So I think that the concern was being raised was that parents, under the impression that you know no matter what I do 
it's a year now
, if I commit it's a full year, that's not going to be the case. 
We're going to look at it on a quarterly basis. 
Again, it's change. 
There could be 
a week wake up tomorrow with an executive order which states that parents, you know, can make the choice on daily basis. 
You know so um you know, so 
I uh. 
I think that what it's going to be is that the district will look at it. 
We're going to look at our operational needs, we're going to look at the parental needs and make you know an informed decision, but that the benchmark be on a quarterly basis. 
Would it help if we provided some sample language 
and then you're able to let us know if that language looks appropriate, because we can send that out. 
You know as quick as uh. 
You know sunday evening or monday morning for folks perfect. 
Thank you any other questions. 
All right. 
We are back in the agenda letter f approval of minutes. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr mike caruso second and by meredith opie. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried number two. 
We are in the visitors section public comment that pertains to the agenda. 
I'm just going to need those cards or, if you're going to call them, is fine too 
yeah 
sure I'm going to call up the names we do have several. 
I just wanted to make a reminder announcement that the visitor section, the public comment is in fact a public comment. 
It's not a question and answer type of period, so I know that some of the cards that we are getting do have questions on them. 
I think possibly it's better. 
You know to if, if questions are asked, we can have them written down 
and we can take your email and we can have a response sent to you by email. 
If that's good or mr picarella, if you want, we can also include them in our forum on monday. 
That's fine 
right 
yeah. 
I just think it would possibly be best to email or you know, speak with you separately regarding 
okay, um. 
So the first gentleman, mr caputo, I'm sorry capuano, 
oh okay, my name is mike capuano. 
My daughter is brooke capuano. 
She goes to sagem, you have an excellent school here 
and you have an excellent school because you have the best teachers in the country. 
I believe, when you take the teachers away, you have a bunch of buildings here: okay, uh, to think that you're going to lock a child in a room with a bunch of books 
and if you could fast forward 10 years that, like a doctor or a lawyer, is going to walk out of that room. 
It's just not going to happen. 
Okay, now the main reason that we're all here is the six foot: six foot: six foot: six foot- 
that's all we're here for why? 
Don't we tell everybody that that's a farce? 
If you build the partitions around the desk, the six foot is not necessary and I called osha 
and I called the governor's hotline. 
Okay, if you build the glass petition, the teachers are worried. 
Also. 
I understand that if you build a glass petition against the front, the teachers could walk in the back and they would be behind the petition. 
711 protects their cashiers and they all come in when it's time for their shift and 
they're back there. 
Furthermore, the children could walk in behind their petitions and take their masks off. 
The teachers could be up there with the blackboards and take their masks off and everything would be back to normal. 
This is all we're all here, because we're refusing to build the petitions. 
You could take that desk. 
There's schools that have taken that desk and they divide it like this boom and boom 
and there's four children on that desk 
and it's totally legal you can be. 
When you put a mask on then or any kind of petition, they said you could be nose to nose. 
I was just in a restaurant that was so packed the booth, the person right behind me I turned around. 
I was looking right in his face. 
I called the hotline from there because- and they said as long as there's a petition, there was a petition in between the booths and the petition was only this tall. 
I was looking in the guy's eyes and they said there's no regulations for the height of the petition. 
Okay, so all we need is the petition, and all this is gone. 
Okay, second of all, second solution: why don't you just have the people that want to come into school and the teachers that want to come into school come in and the ones that want to stay home and the children that want to stay home stay home instead of forcing the ones that are horrified to come in to come in and the ones that are desperate to come back in. 
My daughter wants her teachers and she wants her school 
and she wants her friends. 
Okay, what? 
If all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in? 
Everybody who needed to came in to to help 
and they kept america going to mind odds that the schools are the only ones that let us down now, as this gentleman said these kids in five years, if we could fast forward to the ones that are starting now, they won't be able to read and write. 
I don't know how many people go to europe, but our kids already can't read and write. 
We are kids in college. 
That can't add this is the death knell of america. 
This is not some small thing here that you're deciding and there's no reason. 
These are guidelines. 
Schools all around you hop hog everything else open five days. 
This is your decision to do in the generation right here. 
Remember that this is the beginning of the end of america, okay, god. 
We hope that they rescind this, but if they don't rescind this, this few years here will be known as the covid dummies. 
They won't make it into college. 
They won't do anything and there's no reason 
and anyway. 
Lastly, I want to say, if you open the schools, why bother the first kid or the first teacher that gets covered you're going to close all of sagem? 
So this is all the foss all this money, the reopening programs and everything. 
It's all a big fuss, 
okay, it's it because this is being treated like the bubonic plague. 
Mr capuano
, I'm sorry there's a three minute time limit. 
Okay, thank you. 
Studies all around the world have opened up. 
There's not one case. 
The ymca tracked their own tracing 40, 000. 
Kids, not one mr kevin. 
Thank you very much for coming. 
We appreciate it. 
Thank you so much for listening 
and I wanna say. 
Lastly, the governor said this is for us to talk not three minutes. 
I listened to this young lady for three hours. 
That was not the guidelines. 
You're worried about guidelines, guidelines, the governor said the people should be able to come in and talk not listen to. 
You guys tell me what to do with my child. 
Okay. 
Thank you very much. 
Okay, uh miss uh muchitash. 
Please can I just start sure 
yeah 
um hi, my name is 
lauren mukhitash 
um I've been in station for 13 years 
now I have elementary age children, I'm going to jump the agenda. 
Oh I'm sorry
, um, I'm going to jump the agenda a little bit uh and go to item 12. 
um there's been a proposal to create a divor diversity task force in sacrum, central school district. 
I'm here to voice my support for the creation of that task. 
Force sachem student body is comprised of 25 percent racial minority students. 
Our e and l students represent a staggering 98 different languages spoken within this district of 13 000 students. 
Our students represent a multitude of cultures, religions and abilities representation matters. 
Our multifaceted student body deserves to see themselves reflected in their teachers and administrators in the books they have access to and read 
and then the curriculum they are taught. 
So I would just plead with the board. 
Please don't render this to a toothless subcommittee with no power. 
There are lots of things that I love about sagem, and I think that this is a step in the direction to improve upon what we already have a strong foundation for. 
Thank you. 
I'm sorry. 
Next is uh. 
Mr warren 
hi uh, my name is jason moore, I'm a parent in the community, uh sageman graduate. 
I would like to make a plea to the board: please value and respect the school community by maintaining a high standard of transparency and communication at all times, but particularly in times of crisis. 
The communication from the central office and the board has been unacceptable. 
It is essential for every member of the school community students, teachers and families to be constantly updated at all times about every aspect of the reopening process. 
The meeting this meeting was not advertised to the school community at large. 
There were five parents outside barely and they left please as soon as possible, communicate the following. 
Please communicate the following to community immediately. 
How will we ensure that our remote students are receiving an equitable education? 
I can't accept that they will receive a subpar education. 
You've put in your email that I received. 
While I was standing up front says it will not be the same. 
I need it to be equitable. 
I need my child to get an equitable education. 
They need to be live instruction and ongoing assessment. 
We need to figure it out. 
We need to put programmers in place. 
We need to figure it out. 
It has to be figured out. 
We cannot make an exception where part of our school community is receiving a subpar education. 
It's not acceptable, not acceptable to me should not be acceptable to you 
and it's not acceptable to your teaching staff. 
I know that for a fact. 
Secondly, a building space plan must be made available to the teacher to the parents of this community with individual room measurements and the capacity to maintain authentic social distancing at all times, and I need to know about the source of ventilation. 
I need to know what the school buildings look like. 
If you're telling me 17 kids in a classroom, I need to know that there's room for 42 square feet for every 17 one of those students I need. 
I need that in writing. 
Before I even think about sending my child back, I need clear opportunities for all parents to participate in this process. 
I shouldn't stumble upon this. 
I should be knowing about this weeks in advance. 
I need specific criteria for testing and tracing in all school buildings. 
I need a contingency plan for what happens when the rate of transmission rises above three percent. 
What do I do with my child? 
How do I make accommodations? 
I need to know these things before we put our kids on those buses. 
It's unacceptable that you're asking me to put a remote survey in place by friday, and your first parent meeting is on monday. 
That's unacceptable. 
The parents need to know. 
What's going on, the school community needs to know. 
What's going on, the teachers need to know, everybody needs to know it's unacceptable, please. 
I need you to do a better job of communicating with the school community. 
Most important details need to be related to about our children's education in the future. 
Please address these issues immediately. 
The students, the teachers, the families in this community deserve at least this much. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much. 
Miss favaro campbell 
hi, I'm michelle for campbell. 
I wanted to just address the board about the diversity task force. 
As all of you know, I started that email and requested that it be put on the agenda and that you all consider creating one. 
It's been 10 years that I, my daughter, started 
well she's going to be a senior now so 10 years ago 
I actually started talking to a lot of district office, which is very changed now. 
Maybe mr scavo might have been on the board of ed back then I don't remember, but most of you are not we're not then um. 
It's been 10 years, since my family started talking about the having more diversity and representation within sachem 
and I'm really excited to see it finally make an agenda. 
I want to also make it really clear that it's about race, religion and abilities. 
I want children in wheelchairs to see themselves in books in their classrooms. 
I want children with autism to know that they are just as represented as every other kid in every princess book in every superhero story, and I want to help show our curriculum expand to teach children that kids with down syndrome can be teachers, because there are stories of preschool teachers who have down syndrome and kids, who are deaf and blind can grow up to graduate harvard law, school and become disability advocates and travel the entire world, and I right now we just don't show that we don't have the staff. 
We don't have diversity in our staff. 
We don't have diversity even in the books that they see when they walk into a classroom. 
So I just wanted to thank you all for putting it on the agenda tonight and for entertaining the idea and to understand that it's actually bigger than one issue
, it's about every kid at sagem walking into their classroom, walking through hallways and right now, where I know reopening and dealing with covid, but this has been 10 years actually a little bit more in the making and sacrum is going to go on long before my daughter, who's going to be a senior and my son is going to be a freshman in high school they're going to be gone, and I don't want to leave that task force 
like I want this to be 10 years from now. 
Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program has a very different experience than what they had, and so that's really important to me that you all knew that. 
So. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss sanders, hello, everyone, 
oh hello, everyone, maria sanders, um! 
I am a parent um. 
I would like to just make a statement um in respect to the reopening committee. 
I 
I was a member of the reopening committee 
and I just would like to express my disappointment in the fact that the committee had no part in the actual planning or process of of the plan that was presented to the community. 
My understanding was that we would be part of that process, but instead we had two meetings where we were basically given the list of directives as administration and and the board of vet had planned. 
So basically, we got a sneak peek and the ability to ask a few questions, though I certainly respect the time and effort and energy that administrators put in, and I will not take anything away from that. 
You fail to utilize the very volunteers that you asked for because there was a tremendous amount of talent within that grouping 
and we certainly could have helped you in putting together this plan for myself having students in second in middle school and high school. 
I recognize that this plan is not going to be adequate for them and again, 
though, I understand right now, we we're hoping that the testing standards are loosened. 
The value of a full-time education will not be, and these children cannot get a full-time education when they're in school. 
Fifty percent of the time they're only seeing a teacher, fifty percent of the time 
and they're they're sitting home in front of a computer for the other 50 that amounts to 10 days a month when normally they would be in school for five days a week. 
So I just asked that in the future, when you come to the community- 
and you ask us to step up and come in and help you really utilize us, because our voice really has not been heard. 
That's it! 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Uh miss williamson, nicole williamson, okay, uh, miss cologne, hi everyone, I'm josephine scalon. 
I have a soon to be second and third grader, and I just have a question because I'm still undecided about the virtual verse going to action school. 
If you go to school and you start in the school, do you have the option of then going virtual? 
Would that be an option? 
So I'm sorry 
go ahead. 
I'm sorry! 
So we're in this portion of the agenda. 
We're not allowed to do back and forth and answer questions. 
If you'd like we can have your question written down and leave your contact and we will answer any question that you have. 
I can promise thanks. 
Thank you very much. 
Is it allison? 
Is it on the court? 
Is her email on the card? 
There's a phone number on the card. 
Do you want to put an email perfect? 
Thank you so much um, the next one was also um several questions. 
Would you prefer to contact this person as well? 
I mean I mean he's been waiting, so 
if he wants to ask him and then it's miss rep rapuno, okay, thank you, yeah! 
That's all! 
For the first section uh we are on page two at the bottom number. 
Three business items consent agenda a through c, and I have a motion. 
Please motion by bill cogan second, by laura slattery. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried sorry bottom of page three personnel consent agenda. 
A through l. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
This is kate bleedin. 
So this is an unusual way to welcome many of our new staff, as we um are having our first kind of live forum most of the time we have folks here to welcome them in person, and some of you are virtual. 
We would like to welcome all of our new staff that we vetted through really intense interview processes this summer with our administrative staffs in the building and staff members, uh faculty uh involved in the whole process and um. 
That includes clerical custodial teachers, teachers, assistants and I think we have also gotten to um the administrative section. 
Did I catch that correctly? 
Okay, so we're through the l- 
and I just want to welcome those folks that are in consent, agendas, uh. 
So far, thanks number five is support staff consent agenda a through j. 
Can I please have a motion motion by meredith second, by jimmy and caruso. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried christie. 
Did you want me to stop again 
yeah cause? 
I think you have michael there. 
Yep uh joining us today is michael emanuel um. 
He is over here to my left, the far right, if you wanted to just stand and give yourself a wave, uh michael, is joining us today, as the network and systems administrator 
he's been a integral part of our technology, um staff who have been working with jack renda in it. 
We're really excited about all the great things that we're going to continue to get the growth for our technology as we push through and put our smart schools um investment through and and enhance the use of our technology for our students and our staff. 
So welcome michael, we are on the top of page 12 number six personnel administrators consent agenda. 
A through g motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
okay, we'd like to take a moment to recognize two other folks in the uh audience today. 
Uh joining us is dennis mcelherne um. 
If you want to give a wave- not quite sorry, I'm trying to stay on top of it here. 
They're. 
This close, this close sorry guys a little more suspense 
we're going to be towards the top of page 14 letter h, probationary appointment of the administrative personnel. 
There you go andy. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr coggins? 
Second by mr wadawa discussion, discussion um. 
I will be voting uh no on this in the next two personnel items. 
Uh. 
My reasons are the same as they've been for the past several board meetings concerning central administrative positions. 
That is, I believe, the new superintendent should be part of the process in any administrative appointments. 
Uh. 
What I must make perfectly clear is that these candidates, as well as those from the prior meetings, are qualified and capable of the positions to which they are being offered, and I would fully support them if the new superintendent was part of the process. 
So this is a process, negative vote and nothing to do with the personnel uh. 
The new superintendent is close. 
I mean we're almost there 
and we certainly have qualified staff who could perform these functions for a short time as interims, so that for that reason, and that reason alone, I'm voting no on the next three administrative positions. 
I must stress it has nothing to do with the individuals. 
I fully support them and would support them in the future. 
Mr kieran, just because you asked for a discussion and for the public and anybody at home by losing our superintendent, our assistant superintendent and our special ed director
, we would have left three positions open where we would have needed interims and just for argument's sake, mr o'keefe. 
What is the going rate for an interim at that level per day? 
For which position are we speaking? 
Let's say it's: the superintendent um rates vary, but a going rate for superintendent is probably 12 to 1300 a day, and then what about the assistant super? 
An assistant superintendent, depending upon which position it could be 800 to 1000 a day and an executive director of special ed would also probably be in a similar range, a minimum of 800 a day. 
So what and- 
and I don't necessarily disagree with your argument- 
but what what we did was we took a vote to have these positions filled. 
We had three people doing five people's jobs and it between losing that on a normal year is almost impossible, but losing it during covet is is impossible um and we put things into motion to have these positions filled by qualified people to save that money, and this is money that I mean we we already just talked about taking custodians off- that we don't even know if buildings are going to get cleaned in time. 
Now we want to take more money out by filling these positions with indoors. 
I think that that's a slippery slope if we go down that path. 
Well, I appreciate what you're saying uh my my uh. 
My position is that a superintendent of schools, uh, is the single most important person in the district and totally accountable to us and the district for making decisions and to have a superintendent of schools, not part of the process. 
Even though a new superintendent come in and doesn't know, the personnel is certainly going to ask the qualified people who who they are and do cement and be part of the interview process. 
I 
I think that's even more important than the saving of a few dollars here and there, but that's 
I mean I
, I see I'm alone in that position, but I stand by it. 
I 
I understand where you're coming from I just if I don't appoint somebody until september 1
, that's a long period of time at thirteen hundred dollars a day, eight hundred dollars a day, and while it seems like a few dollars here and there over a three month period that we haven't had people that it starts to add up, and when we need money down the line, I would be afraid that we put it on in a room 
is when we had qualified people who could take these positions immediately? 
I will remind you of your fiscal prudence soon, [Laughter] alex just because we're having a discussion, 
so mr 
kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight
, I I have personally known all of them. 
So it's without hesitation that I think that they are the best fit for sachem. 
I don't care who our superintendent is. 
I've trusted mr o'keefe, as our interim superintendent, to make the recommendations, and I 100 percent agree that any superintendent coming in will not find any better candidates than the ones we're putting forth tonight. 
Opposed motion is carried dennis uh, we're going to start with andrew larson, so andrew just want to welcome you to the high school north principalship um, 
andy has been a teacher in our schools. 
He's been in personnel, he's been in an elementary hiawatha principleship, a sagamore principalship, an ap and two of our high schools, uh and now he's joining the ranks of the leader um ship in north 
and we'd like to welcome you and wish you all the best we are on letter. 
I probationary appointment of the executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion. 
Please motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
[Applause] dennis mclehern. 
He's 
he's welcome back to sacham. 
He has been in our school district working as a school psychologist, an assistant to uh coordinator for special education. 
He left for a short stint to go over to north bab as a director over there 
and we're really lucky to have him back and part of our team as the executive assist executive director for special education. 
Welcome back [Applause] and letter 
j is an approval of an saa agreement for the executive executive director for special education. 
Can I please have a motion motion by ms slattery? 
Second, if I miss volpe, all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 14. contracts consent agenda. 
A through t. Can I please have a motion ocean by mr coggins second by mrs wadwa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 20.. 
It's an action, itemist number, a mandated new york state board, training for matthew, bauman and robert scavo, all in favor, get kind of a motion motion by mrs volpe second by mr man. 
Caruso all in favor opposed motion is carried number b. 
It's an appointment of board committee members. 
Can I please have a motion motion by miss lottery second by mr scavo. 
Any questions all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
Letter c. Is a board of education retreat? 
Can I please have a motion motion by ms wado, a second by mr bauman, all in favor. 
Any questions sure I just want to make a quick comment: um, especially since we're being fiscally prudent, a retreat is not like gurneys or something it's where we all sit in a room and talk. 
I just want to make sure that that's clear, because we are not going on vacation, though, because my first year I was prepared for gurney's 
and then we sat in the same set library. 
Thank you. 
We are on the top of page 22.. 
I'm sorry 
are we 
I apologize. 
Can I uh all in favor opposed motion is carried the top of page 22 donations consent agenda a through c. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr coggin second by miss ottawa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried number 10 at the bottom of page 22 committee on special education consent agenda, a through b motion by miss volpe. 
Second by mr mancaruso, all in favor opposed motion is carried number 11 monthly reports. 
So we there was a question from the community about when the committees would start meeting and how I think that, maybe, if people that were leading these committees, we want to maybe set some dates. 
We could do something virtually 
I'd like to see the budget committee start talking about if there was a possible mid-year cut and look into any and all options that there was. 
I don't know if there was anything else that you may want to look into, but that's just one that I thought of. 
I don't know about the legislative committee. 
If mr kiernan has anything for the legislative committee, okay, all right number, 12, we are back on public comment. 
This portion of the public comment will be on any and all items that anybody wants to speak at. 
That's not on the agenda, and everyone will have three minutes to discuss and, like we said before, this is not a q a and a back and forth, but we do want everyone to be able to be heard. 
That wants to be heard. 
Okay, the first one is miss young 
[Music]. Oh, I press this. 
Yes, thank you for waiting for so long. 
Thank you. 
You guys have been outside the season board of education, members and community. 
It's come to my attention that vp sarah waterworld wore a bill. 
Okay, okay, we're a blm t-shirt at a board of education meeting. 
This is unacceptable. 
I can respect a person's right to free speech and to have their opinion. 
However, blm is a political movement and it does not belong at our border bed meetings or in our schools and indoctrinations. 
The definition of a racist is paramount in the name of black lives matter. 
The name indicates that black lives matter over the other races. 
This is unacceptable and this racism does not belong, including the blm is putting itself over our law enforcement, which many of our community are employed and of all races this once again making blm a black organization. 
Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has they have not registered as a charitable organization. 
We do not know whether the blm t-shirt, that was worn was for the black lives foundation or movement in either case. 
It has no right if any one of the board members wore my hat supporting trump, I'm sure the same thing would happen. 
The apology that was put on facebook was cynical and scolding. 
Call us as all races and insisting blm is not is not a political issue. 
Last I checked. 
Everyone in america had the same rights regardless of race, sex, color and sexual orientation. 
As specific cases of discrimination are happening in our community, then we must address those issues. 
What offended me is the use of rap music before sporting events, glorifying women's segregation, drug use and the cursing and the songs with the word and in it this is not acceptable. 
If we are going to talk about discrimination, it can it's got to be used both ways. 
So, let's start by banning that bml, not political, tell that to the murder black trump supporter bernal tramell. 
Furthermore, the disgusting political use of blm as an attack on our police and blue lives is not acceptable. 
Our community of all sects and races is made up of law enforcement. 
Blm is declaring war against all blue lives matter. 
Miss young there's a three-minute time limit. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much, miss o'connell, so conor. 
Thank you very much for waiting. 
I know that it's been a while 
okay. 
Well, I am beyond angry at what is going on with our children. 
Okay, we are not doing the right thing by our children in any way, shape or form at this point in time whether we want to send our children to school or keep them home. 
Neither of those options currently are acceptable. 
I sent everybody board members in email. 
I got one reply challenged every one of your board members to go and spend 10 minutes in one of the one of the classrooms. 
On the first floor in the second floor of one of the high schools did any of you do that 
yeah? 
I didn't think so. 
Yet you all think it's fine, obviously that we have no ventilation in the classrooms for crying out loud. 
We have to have special ventilation in the malls and other businesses, but where our most vulnerable are we don't? 
None of you would work in these classrooms in the current conditions, none of you. 
So why would you think it's okay for our children to be in there even before this, but 
definitely now now the air in those classrooms just stands there, because there's no movement, there's, no, nothing and covert will stand in the air until it falls down on somebody so you're putting our children in an environment that is guaranteeing that if somebody has gold, but it's going to get on all the rest of them horrendous
, it's despicable and now I'm hearing that remote learning is going to be a joke. 
That's not okay! 
Either! 
Okay, I don't want my child in one of those rooms. 
I want my child safe, but my child is taking five ap classes next year, which means he needs a robust distance learning program. 
But my understanding is we're not doing that. 
Am I incorrect? 
No okay. 
So what we're doing to our children is despicable and you should all be ashamed of yourself just a second. 
Mr block, just a second, mr kyle 
I'll get your answer question right now. 
I had a conversation with him. 
You know, I know that you were asking the question about the uh being restricted in terms of the assembly 
yeah, 
but it's pursuant to the governor's executive order, one of the number of executive orders 202.45
, I looked. 
I believe I looked at that one, and that was talking about social media. 
This is okay, I'm just gonna back up just a little bit just so we can keep our space now. 
It talks about non-essential gatherings. 
Yes, and this is not essential. 
That's correct as long as while we're virtual, because you still have the option of being virtual, the board decided to assemble. 
Oh so so you guys decided. 
This was not essential. 
So because you decided the governor, that's not that they don't decide. 
No! 
So who decides well, there's based upon the governor's orders. 
The governor said that this is an honest. 
The governor said that we can conduct this meeting virtually or yes, you can yes 
but yeah. 
So as long as you can conduct it, virtually meeting is considered to be non-essential because you have the ability to be able to connect the virtual reality. 
Okay, thanks thank you for that. 
It's, mr black, 
so 202.45 it was extended by 202.53 and it's in effect, until august 20th, okay, 
next fury good evening, I'm a proud sacrum educator and a parent of three daughters who attend sageman schools. 
I'm here tonight to voice my concerns regarding the secondary reentry plan. 
I have a daughter in eighth grade 
and I also have a senior. 
I have grave concerns regarding the lack of an equitable education for our secondary students. 
These children will suffer the ramifications of this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
In some instances, this decision may change the course of their adult lives. 
I don't want that to happen to my children 
and I don't want it to happen to anyone else's. 
I implore you to reconsider this plan and attempt to find a way to make the secondary re-entry plan more equitable, so that our chm students can receive 100 of the curriculum that they are entitled to just like our elementary students. 
Thank you. 
That's all 23 board discussions. 
The first one we put on today uh was an adoption of the 20 2021 calendar. 
There was a talk of a change. 
Mr o'keefe 
yeah. 
It's just you know something I want to bring to the board's attention because obviously administration has been meeting with district administrators as well as our teachers looking at the opening of school and just trying to be sure that we can be as prepared as possible for whatever that is. 
Other districts have taken a look at this and also um chosen that option each year a district is allowed up to four superintendents conference days. 
Our current calendar has three uh. 
The first two uh are in september the september second, and third days are superintendents conference days um and the third one would be. 
On election day november. 
Third, we've been discussing the possibility of having the board consider the ninth, which is wednesday
, I'm sorry, eighth, which would be the the first day of school for students to be a third superintendent's conference day in september uh. 
That would give staff teachers administrators everything all the time that they need to be sure if there are those last minute, tweaks changes to classroom setups changes to schedules assignments. 
Whatever the case is, you know, I had a lengthy conversation with mr barbara last night. 
You know his guidance. 
Counselors are ready to dive in to do whatever work needs to be done to make our secondary experience as good as possible, but we need the data first. 
So once we have that data we can dive in on this, we don't have much time and time is not on our side um. 
So for your consideration, um we'd like to talk about adding the eighth as a superintendent's conference day. 
Would we have to remove another day off the calendar for that we would just convert that date to a super. 
I wouldn't alter the calendar right now other than that. 
Obviously, since the year hasn't even begun, uh it still keeps us within legal limits. 
It still leaves us the flexibility if we were to have a severe winter um. 
You know, maybe with the new reality of our ability to switch between distance learning. 
Maybe that can even help us. 
You know in bad storms and things like that, where we might be able to turn something like that on and not lose instructional time, but I think giving the staff that extra time, especially since we're down to the wire uh you know, could be helpful now on the counter side. 
Obviously, families are already starting to make plans they're ready to send kids back on the 8th 
they've already made decisions they've arranged child care. 
Whatever the case is so it isn't just as simple as you deciding let's re-adopt a calendar, and maybe it's not even something you do tonight. 
Maybe it's something you consider you think about, and maybe it's on the next agenda for the 26th, but I wanted to bring it to your attention to give you some time to think about it and talk about it. 
Um you know. 
Is it a possibility where we could consider that day, uh for additional staff planning? 
Does anybody have a question about the calendar? 
I'm just thinking we're gonna make this decision. 
We have to make it tonight, so parents do have enough time to make arrangements. 
Mr bauman, can you um what kind of professional development day would it look like? 
What would it look like? 
Well, it would be a useful day for the teachers too 
yeah. 
It's not a none. 
I mean miss heinz, can speak better to the professional development days. 
None of them are going to be like the normal professional development days. 
I'm sorry
, I didn't mean professional development superintendent's day. 
Would it be a day that the teachers would be able to kind of get their stuff together? 
Yes, we 
so I mean, as we've been saying, our teachers have been working hard all summer ongoing professional development. 
This is really more honored space for them, so they can continue to clean up. 
Get things ready, make sure the google classrooms all their lessons, are in place. 
So not our traditional. 
You know ad camp style superintendents conference days, but we recognize that it's a tremendous amount of work to get started. 
Does anybody have any other questions? 
Does anybody want to vote on it tonight or did you was the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready? 
It came through a conversation. 
You know, administration and staff have asked for it. 
So I agree with sarah the earlier the better I would agree as well. 
We can vote on it right now. 
All right motion to change the calendar to the eighth being a staff development day. 
Second, by miss volpe, all in favor opposed the calendar is done, get that information out to families as quickly as possible. 
The next item up for discussion is future board letter writing. 
This is something that I personally put on. 
I 
I don't think that we should be putting letters out to the community if, with all of our names on it, if we don't agree with what it says, um and I could be in the minority on that- 
but I'm I would be fine with writing a letter, putting spaces underneath and letting those who agree. 
Do it now 
most times it's a nine, nothing 
and there's no issues 
but um. 
You know I personally didn't agree with the letter that got put out and if my name is going to be on it especially admonishing another board member. 
I have to agree with it um and that's just the way I personally feel about it. 
I understand that we're a body 
and I get that, 
but at the end of the day, it's our name 
and we have to put our head on our pillows 
and if we don't agree with something I want everyone to have the freedom to not only say that but be able to just to live with the decisions that are made and to be able to stand up to the community and say here. 
I did this or I did not do this and have a straight face when you say it, 
I 
I just 
I didn't agree and 
it's my fault for you know ever putting my name on that piece of paper. 
So I just I want to put it from here on out. 
If anyone has an issue, please feel free, but if, whatever letter it is, we write the letter, our names are on the bottom and we can sign the letter if we agree with it. 
If we don't, we take the space away and then you don't have to sign it. 
If you don't want to, but at least you can, you can make your own decision and you don't have to feel like you're beholden, 
because maybe it's only five people who agree with it and five out of the nine agree and now, all of a sudden, it's a board decision and your name goes on it, no matter what jim 
so uh, how do you determine whose name is going on 
suppose four people want the letter out is: is that sufficient to send the letter with four names? 
That's uh! 
That's why it's up for discussion, so I did it. 
So it's got to be a majority. 
Take to even have the letter go out, so five members have to support it and then, let's suppose it's a 5-4, the letter does go out board of education and the five members who agree with it sign it. 
That's 
I'm going to see that if anybody had an issue with that, I I just wanted to address it tonight so that we haven't had a chance to get all together in a room. 
So so let me express you on the opposite end of the spectrum. 
If four people want to put a letter out and it's a four or five board, the four people be able to put a letter out, because the way that, when you sign up for the board of education, you sign up as a group, 
okay 
and you vote as a group- 
okay 
and hey, listen, there are things that happened in the past. 
Why? 
I was on the no side of a vote where I got dragged to the mud, but I signed up for that 
yeah. 
You know, so my my impression is that five is a majority and and it's what moves resolutions and it's what moves you know uh. 
You know uh different different uh incent, you know initiatives and so on and so forth. 
So so I think the easy way to do that is that when you're getting attacked by a community member okay, because of what the letter says, your response is look the board. 
The board majority voted on it. 
I don't necessarily agree with it. 
You know, if you have concerns, please contact the rest of the board. 
You know right 
and that's how we leave it. 
Just just my just my personal opinion this I happen to disagree 
only because when we pass, let's just say the new principle for sage of north in the in the minutes, it will reflect that jim voted. 
No, it's not going to vote that. 
Yes, we voted yes, but if you go look in the in the back to it, jim can say I 
I 
I said no 
and he could say anybody to the community 
and here's why I voted no and he could put his head on his polo 
and he's fine like it will not reflect that. 
I said no and, and just like, I think it's wrong- that you get dragged through the mud on stuff that you voted no for, and you can't even back it up, because there is no record of you ever saying. 
No, unless you look through certain things on votes 
yeah, 
but if it's a letter, there's no record of anybody saying no, 
but if the letter's coming from the board of education is it coming from the board of education? 
Is it coming from five board members? 
I mean I, so I guess my point is: I don't think we should be writing any letter. 
That's admonishing another member 
I mean most most letters are in agreement to the state saying we need our funding to the state saying we don't agree with certain things that they're doing, but we should certainly not be or so um and- 
and maybe, mr black, you can answer this. 
When we get elected to the board of education, my voice means nothing more than anybody sitting out there. 
My voice only means one as part of us nine. 
We 
I have no say I can't decide anything. 
I have no more decision making than my neighbor next door. 
My my only input or influence comes as as a board of nine, so the letters that we had done previously, like supporting our seniors graduating in person or the denouncement of betty devos as the education or denouncing racism that was issued as a board, not as me as an individual. 
So I think legally, mr black, if you could just give us some guidance here that, when the board of education of sagem school district issues a letter, I think it has to come from the board. 
If laura slattery, who who lives in wisconsin, wants to send a letter to governor cuomo, then I signed my name: laura slattery, not laura slattery, ch, board of education, trustee and- 
and that's 
I feel that me on this board, I'm not a republican democrat independent anything. 
I am representing a community of 55 000 registered voters, my personal opinions or anything I feel 
personally does not matter when I'm sitting here with the nine nine of us. 
My only thing that I can do as a board trustee is in as a majority of this board. 
Unless, legally you see something, that's how I feel I was elected by the voters. 
I was elected by my sachim community. 
I 
I feel like I have to represent my sagem community as one of nine, not as laura slattery individual and, of course I don't think, that's being suggested um, 
but um we're a governing body and every governing body around the country 
operates that way. 
You operate as a body, you're elected to be part of this body. 
You make decisions as a as a body. 
There may be differences of opinion, that's part of our democracy. 
That's what makes our country great um you'll, be able to express those opinions. 
At the end of the day, you have to make a collective decision, and then you have to abide by the decision that that body makes one possible solution. 
Is that um? 
If you are going to issue a letter and there's concerns that um dissenting members vote is not going to be known like it is? 
When we take a public vote, you can take a public vote to send the letter, and then you can adopt that letter as a majority vote. 
Those who dissent are on as a matter of record 
they're on 
they're on record
, if that's the case, so so you're saying that no one member is allowed to remove their name from a letter. 
I would say that that's not typical practice that you would see, but is it legal for a member to remove a name um? 
Well, if the, when your letter is going out um, I don't think it typically sets forth all the names. 
I don't know. 
I don't really like to say it. 
Has it printed all your names on the left side, it says, there's a list of all the names and on the bottom
, it's the president's name. 
So, on the left side of the letter it has all of our names listed 
yeah. 
But that's your that's! 
Your letterhead 
right 
yeah lists all your names. 
It doesn't indicate whether or not you voted for that letter to go out or not. 
It's you're represented on that letterhead. 
It's an official board of education stationery! 
That's why your name is on there. 
It's not signaling that you voted for that or not, but the recognition is, though, that when you do take a vote or when the board puts out material that that's so 
so that's a fine
, that's a compromised decision. 
I think that any and all letters should be discussed in public and voted in our public. 
That is a concern that you have that's one way of addressing it. 
Yeah I I was just going. 
I was just going to say that that sounds like an excellent idea and that really just goes back to like 
you said about my vote. 
You know is on record and your eight votes are on record for these fine individuals here. 
So that would be the same thing. 
We discuss a letter. 
You know we take a vote on it. 
Yes, if it's a majority vote, the letter will go, but the dissenters are also in the minutes. 
I like it 
and I'm 100 in agreement with that. 
This way, it's a public discussion. 
Anybody can look back, but then we still are issuing a letter based on a majority of the board, but as long as there's a record of who votes yes and who votes? 
No, I'm correct. 
I am 100 fine with that. 
Just one statement and me and laura have gone round and round about this before, but I want to. 
I want to make this point. 
Look we're all elected members to this board as any elected official is. 
If I want to write a letter- 
and I want to sign my letter bill, cogan board trustee sachem, I'm 100 within my rights- to do that. 
It's a matter of opinion as to whether or not I should do that 
if I want to get together with four other board members and each one of us want to sign it as board trustees. 
Once again, we are within our rights to do that. 
All right. 
It may be perceived as a bad idea by this board, but there's nothing illegal about it. 
Okay, inside it's not a vote. 
I don't think we're going to take here. 
I just I just wanted to make sure that we discussed it and there was at least a public so that all future letter writing is done in public and just also just to add to it. 
It's been customary that at the bottom of the letter, the signature block states, the president's name on behalf of yeah 
just signed the letter sincerely the sachin board of education and not place the president's name on the bottom of the letter. 
Okay, uh, the last item up for discussion is the diversity task force. 
So, as you guys know, I gave you guys all an outline about what just got a little bit closer. 
Sorry, I gave you all the um an outline, probably in the end of july, and I don't know if you all got a chance to look it over 
yeah. 
I shared it with the board again um the other day. 
Sarah. 
So I would just like to like make a motion to put it on to vote tonight on establishing this task force. 
Yeah 
I mean my my only issue is, and I don't have a problem with this diversity task force, but the way community committees are usually done is that we could vote to establish one give direction to administration to come back as to what the charge is going to be talk about the charge and then approve it um. 
I 
I 
I would say that that's that's, probably the route we should go and in the years that have been on the board
, we establish construction capital projects, committees and you know some are established for one specific job 
and then they 
they they disappear, and that was for um one of the uh. 
You know construction projects that we did um after that 
we didn't do any for a while. 
So we didn't need that organization, but I would say that we we either vote on it tonight. 
Yes, we want to pursue something like this. 
We understand what the end game is, what we're trying to achieve and then um normally what happened is administration would put together a packet of a pamphlet, that's made available to the community. 
They could download it in a pdf format. 
People would sign up for it submit in the same way they would for a budget advisory committee. 
You know or so 
or you know any other thing, so I would just say that we we follow that format. 
You know and- 
and you know, we're not adopting exactly what 
the world no 
but we're establishing a diversity, task force and and charging administration to come back to us with what the charge is going to be. 
I would have no problem with that. 
Any questions everyone all in favor of 
I'm sorry, yep uh. 
I read the whole thing like lots of times. 
I think it's great, you know we need it here in saturn, all in favor, all right any opposed. 
Mr picariello, this still uh one visitor that we had called wasn't here at the time. 
Um miss williamson. 
Thank you, miss williamson, I'm sorry! 
I know that it's late, I apologize. 
I was doing yard work 
and I was listening. 
Thank you and I had to come 
so I apologize um. 
This is my first time doing anything like this, so I really don't have anything written out or able to look up anything outside. 
So I'll tell you about myself. 
I have four children, three at hiawatha, two of them with severe nut allergies and one of them with viral induced asthma. 
I didn't, I don't really know. 
Well, let me just go with this. 
My kids are fine, they will be homeschooled and they will be homeschooled. 
Well. 
What about all the other children that aren't as lucky as my kids? 
How come? 
Nobody is talking about them? 
How come what nobody's talking about the children getting hit at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't eating at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't learning or being sexually abused at home? 
Nobody cares about those kids. 
I hear a lot of things, how we're emptying the rooms and there's going to be nothing in there? 
No one's allowed to touch each other, no one's allowed near each other. 
We're not we're teaching our kids to be scared. 
I was scared for a long time. 
I've been hurt. 
I've been scared of allergies and a nut killing. 
My child fear cannot run us. 
We need to stand up for who we are and what we believe in 
and I believe all our children deserve a fair chance at life 
and we are not giving it to them. 
I think I think that's it. 
Thank you very much. 
I know that you waited a while. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Letter c is board of ed discussion. 
Future agenda items future discussion. 
Items excuse me: does anyone have anything future to talk about covered three tonight? 
We okay, the next meeting. 
I don't know if that's the right date. 
That's today. 
No, the 26th okay is august. 
26Th
, we're hoping to still be here at 7, 30 p.m. 
Can I have a motion to move into executive session 
yeah 
now we need a reason. 
Mr block um, we're discussing uh uh we're discussing uh property, yes, property. 
I'm sorry! 
I just lost me. 
First real estate transaction, yes real estate transaction. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins say goodbye, mr bauman. 
All in favor meeting is good. 
Thank you very much. 
Everyone good night be careful. 
Going home, okay.
Thank you very much. 
Um is [Music], read the congratulations um, so, okay, okay, visitors! 
Well, everyone please rise for the pledge and then remain standing for a moment of silence with liberty and justice for all. 
Thank you [Music] good evening. 
Everyone, as you can see, the board of education is attempting to return to some form of public meeting, which is also compliant within the limits set forth by the governor's executive orders and the guidelines of the cdc and department of health. 
We must limit the number of people permitted to be physically present as a part of our compliance with those obligations. 
Perhaps the most important item for our meeting tonight is a public discussion about the reopening plan for september, as it pertains to the plan. 
We hope to have answers to most of your questions as part of the presentation, but may also need time for the administration to research, an issue on occasion. 
You can always email the superintendent with the question as well. 
I am also aware that some attendees may wish to speak about matters related to conversations that occurred on social media and the role of the board of education. 
In that regard, if you wish to speak, please be sure to fill out a card and give it to the district clerk. 
There will be two opportunities for public to speak at this meeting. 
The first is limited to comments relating to agenda items only. 
We will then move through the agenda after we complete the agenda items. 
A second opportunity for public comment about non-agenda items will be provided. 
I ask that all present please be reminded to be respectful of one another. 
The administration and the board. 
Also the opportunity for public comment is just that public comment. 
The board of education will not engage in debate or back and forth with the public during the period of public comment in an attempt to provide all who wish to speak an opportunity to do so. 
Our policy limits comments to three minutes. 
There may be people who wish to speak, who have been left outside due to space limitations. 
Please ask security station at the doors for a card and they will bring it in to the clerk again. 
While we respect the community and we always want to provide people with the opportunity to be heard if things devolve into personal insult or invective as the president, I will entertain a motion to adjourn the meeting. 
I thank you all in advance for your cooperation to start tonight's meeting. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe are going to make a presentation about our reentry plan. 
Sure miss florio. 
Could you fire up the cameras for us 
all right just give us a moment. 
While we wait for that and while we're doing that, I'd also like to apologize to those from watching from home, because, unfortunately, obviously from that distance you're not really going to be able to see our screen. 
So for that we're very sorry um. 
You know, unfortunately, the limitations of how many people are in the room you know have we been able to move it to an auditorium. 
We certainly would have done that um, but we're limited to a total of 50 people or 50 of a room's capacity. 
Whichever number is lower uh, so, unfortunately we're at that 50 capacity in this room this evening. 
This document, we're going to show tonight again is another evolving document. 
Back on the 31st, we placed the district's plan on the website, as required by state law. 
That plan had to talk about three different models for return, which it did since the plan was posted on the website. 
You may have seen additional commentary from our governor where he has since changed some of the parameters, such as offering additional opportunities for choice for family uh and or for staff. 
So we need to take those things into consideration um. 
So again, this document and the presentation you're going to see this evening is the most accurate as of now, but it by far is not completed uh at the conclusion of tonight's meeting in this presentation, you're going to get a copy of this presentation emailed to you through the school messenger system, it'll also be up on social media and it'll, be up on our website, you're, also going to receive an invitation to participate in a survey regarding choice. 
It's a follow-up to the survey that we sent out last week, where we asked potential preferences, this one's going to need to be more definitive where we actually need to know which families are looking to have their children receive instruction at home versus those that are willing to send children to school uh. 
So without further ado, I'm going to ask miss heinz to start us off. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe. 
So this morning we actually concluded and had our last committee meeting, which culminated in the plan that we're going to be sharing with you tonight and, as mr o'keefe said, all of the community members will be receiving at eight o'clock a phone call to this manner and um also the plan and the survey for remote learning um. 
I just want to thank all of the folks that were on that committee with us. 
We are made up of several community members unit leaders, staff of all sorts, and it really has been a pleasure to work with everybody. 
Excuse me one second, while I got this on 
okay, 
so after a tremendous amount of feedback that we received from our survey from our community and given the lengthy documents that we have given out and the models over the past few months, I can happily say that we are able to offer a full return for our elementary students k-5, as well as a full return for our students with disabilities, our special class, which would be our 15-1 classes, our 12-1 classes and our 8-1 students, and at the secondary level due to size and the fact that, because we will need to reappropriate space at both levels, elementary and secondary, we will have to move forward with a hybrid model for grades six to twelve, and that will be an a b schedule based on alpha and household. 
The reason why we were able to uh offer a full return for our elementary school is because mr o'keefe and myself and our instructional directors and our director for facilities and the building principal began walk-throughs. 
Last week. 
We walked through each and every room in our buildings to space and measure at six feet. 
On the average we are able to fit about 17 students in a class. 
Now again, please know that we have scheduled a full return with our total population, so with any remote instruction that would diminish the amount of students coming into our schools, so we would actually have even more room because of the re appropriation of space we needed about one extra section or one extra grade level k5 at each building generally, so we are going to be utilizing space in our libraries in our arts and our music rooms and other common areas, which we'll talk about a little bit later on remote learning is something that, as you know, last week, it was confirmed that we will, as districts need to be offering this to our students as well. 
This will be a parent choice and a consent uh tonight at eight o'clock. 
Again, when you receive that plan, there will be a survey in there 
and we ask that only parents who are looking to remotely instruct their child fill out the survey, and it is due. 
It is a fast turnaround by friday. 
We need to be able to staff and schedule the remaining students that we have coming into our schools, remote learning again, 
that is by a parent's choice with consent and no at this time it is a decision for the entirety of the 2021 school year. 
I say this now because, based on the number of possible staff who may also look for accommodations, that might mean staff members staying home in conjunction with our students, we need to match up to see if we have enough staff members who are going to be able to offer remote instruction or should we have to look towards live streaming. 
If we do not have enough certificated staff that matches up with the number of students, and so therefore we would not have possibly a physical space for students to come back to. 
If that were the case, should, of course, all restrictions be lifted through the governor's office, then we would have to, and hopefully would have a little bit of time in between. 
We would just have to restructure and reschedule to ensure that all students are able to return remote instruction will entail. 
It is not like being in person school and it is not distance. 
Learning. 
Distance learning is only going to be offered. 
If, again, we are ordered by the governor's office to remain at home. 
All students and all staff remain at home, and that would be live instruction for two and a half hours on google me that would be k12. 
Remote learning is different. 
This is um, more asynchronous learning with possible, live or streaming teaching happening throughout the day. 
This would also be a schedule that would look a tad different based again on the number of students and how we would need to support everybody, but we just did want to be. 
You know fully upfront and present about that. 
We also know that devices for us 
we are not a one-to-one school district. 
We have definitely made some strides and we are in the middle of major infrastructure work that is going on. 
We just did order about a thousand new chromebooks in order to be able to disperse for families that do not have any technology in their home at all, but it would be difficult for us to provide a device for every student in their home 
should they be on remote learning. 
So that would be something that the family would also have to consider. 
Students will be expected to complete all assignments daily and any students, obviously with disabilities on remote learning, would be provided all of their accommodations as per iep. 
As for their iep 
okay 
um, it's important
, I'm sorry, it's important to just uh also talk about the secondary hybrid model for six to twelve. 
On your a day, let's just say um, you know, for the sake of just explaining it to everybody uh, it would be a combination on on a day. 
You would be in your child would run their traditional regular schedule. 
They would leave with homework and any work that would be on their google classroom for the next day that they are home, while the teacher is then teaching the other second half of the class on b. 
Obviously, our teachers are committed folks and they would be checking in answering any questions uh within that 24-hour period, but we would expect that at the secondary level, again, kids will be making sure that all of their assignments are completed and they are, and they are present. 
Attendance is important as we move forward in this school year. 
Okay, now that we shared with you a model of how we're looking to return our students
, I think it's very important that all families and community members now our staff knows about the health and safety measures that we are putting in place, and we continue to look to put more in place as as time goes on, masks will be required for all staff and students, both in school and on the bus. 
Remember that the bus is an extension of school, any students are having any difficulty wearing a mask for medical reasons or because of a disability will need to submit documentation. 
As always, they would affirm this with their building principle or through the office of student services. 
Mass breaks will be provided because remember in our classrooms. 
Our desks are six feet apart and in the regulations. 
Children do not have to wear a mask during instruction. 
We would encourage, of course, that masks be worn at all times, but that does give us the opportunity to give multiple mass breaks whenever a child does need it, while they're being instructed masks are to be worn, though, however, in the hallways cafeterias, if they're not eating recess any other common area that we would just want to be safe, um, we also every day um. 
Oh I'm, sorry excuse me. 
Uh bus travel will also include, as I said, before, social distancing practices optimally. 
We will be looking for six feet spacing and encouraging family members to sit together. 
Every day, parents and staff will be expected to fill out an online health screening survey and in this presentation, when you do receive it, you will see a hyperlink in there that you can see a sample of what it looks like ahead of time. 
We are also. 
We also took time to ensure that at arrival and dismissal, varied entrances in all of our buildings will be sanctioned off to separate grade levels. 
If they come off of the bus, we are also looking to uh take off the grade levels at increments of time off the bus. 
So everybody is not coming out at the same time so again, just looking to work ways to have plenty of flow while classmans may not look typical, especially at the younger levels. 
You may not see some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see. 
Please know that our classrooms will be warm and inviting like they always are, because their teachers will be there. 
Their principals will be there and we will still be able to decorate it. 
We will just not be able to decorate it with things that kids will be touching, because it would need to be sanitized every day. 
All classrooms will be devoid, as I said before, of any of those items that may collect germs. 
We are in the process right now, of setting up opportunities for our teachers to continue to clean out their their own personal items, and we are also moving out any unwanted furniture that we don't need in the room so that we can maximize 
the space hallways and other common spaces are being marked appropriately to ensure social, distancing, so markings on the floor items around on the walls and that's also shared later on in our presentation. 
So you will be able to see it at home as well. 
When you open up the link hand, sanitizer stations are located throughout each building, all along the hallways. 
We will also be having them at the elementary level or any other area for gym cafeteria time when, at the secondary level, they're able to go out so 
as children go in and out, they can use a hand sanitizer as they come into school. 
All of those uh. 
You know, welcoming areas would have a hand sanitizer station as well and at the elementary level. 
We would expect that the students, because we do have sinks in every room they would be washing their hands before and after snack and before and after lunch. 
Okay, so continued on. 
As I said earlier, we have reappropriated spaces at the elementary level and we are in the process of doing the same walkthroughs. 
Now in the secondary buildings. 
We know it's going to be very difficult, especially for the cafeterias to be utilized the way that they typically are, because children cannot sit in those tables together. 
So moving in some desks, uh looking at classroom use all of those different types of things, but really at the elementary level. 
We will be using again if we're going on full return for all students. 
Right now in elementary school, we would be looking to utilize our music space, our art space, and so therefore, those special areas become pushing for our students. 
We have worked with those departments and we'll continue to work to make sure that they have everything that they need for their lessons and equipment. 
Cleaning of all buildings will occur daily in the evenings in each classroom. 
We will also provide hand, sanitizer, wipes, gloves and any sort of spray bottles and wipe offs for for our staff and or students who feel encouraged to clean in between applicable filters have also been changed in our classroom events uh. 
We will also look to open up our windows and our doors where we can. 
Obviously you know the reverse was safety making sure that your doors were always locked. 
Your windows were always closed. 
Now, we're being encouraged by the department of health to please use fresh air when possible. 
So we will look to do that prior to it becoming too chilly up. 
Isolation areas have been identified in our buildings, and so, if a child uh is it has any sort of of symptoms 
or they come to school 
and they have not filled out the health screening. 
Those students would be placed there so that we can offer a temperature check and make sure that everything looks okay before we send them down to their classroom hygiene protocol visuals will exist in all buildings if they're not there. 
Already and again I share those with you at the end of our presentation so that you can see them. 
We will also be having routine hygiene drills much in the same of how we have regular school building drills at this time. 
Unfortunately, no visitors will be permitted in our schools. 
We just cannot provide enough secure measures for our staff and our students, and so again we will be limiting all visitors. 
Both traditional fire and hygiene. 
Drills will be conducted elementary snack and lunch will be in the classroom to minimize flow and secondary lunch. 
It may be in the cafeteria and alternately in the classrooms. 
We will also rotate any outdoor areas so for recess any of those other matters classes will be rotated on the game field, the basketball court, let's say, for example, and in our playgrounds students, are encouraged to bring their own water bottles. 
We do have bottle filling stations in all of our buildings. 
Our water fountains, unfortunately, will have to be closed at this time. 
Okay, so just some additional elementary return details that we wanted to share with you. 
You know it's always tough to start with health and safety, because again we don't want it to sound, like our students are returning to jail, but we do want to make sure that our students and our staff feel safe for the return. 
But please know that, on top of everything that we are doing, the social emotional well-being of our students is of the utmost importance to us, as well as of our staff, and we have surveyed students and we are looking to survey further the rest of our staff to just find out what are some of those underlying issues or concerns that people have. 
So we can ensure that we have our mental health staff there for supports. 
Unfortunately, we we will have to stress that students may not share materials. 
At this time, students will be assigned their own independent, math, workbooks and guided reading baggies will be provided weekly so that we have time to interchange them out clean them up and leave them for the weekend, so that uh there's a two to three day lag before the children pick up a new baggie and in those items we will integrate. 
As always in our literacy and our math, our science and social studies, topics whenever possible, this will be in addition to the strong direct instruction that our classroom teachers provide. 
Already all all students will be benchmarked for their ela and their math to identify their present learning levels. 
Curriculum will be retard as needed. 
We definitely know that this will need to occur for math, and we have provided some slides in the past that show you that we're fortunate we created our own math curriculum here 
a couple of years back 
and we know uh the the one to two units that each grade level will probably need to go back to so that, if I'm coming into second grade, I'm certainly not going to be able to start on my second grade. 
Math curriculum 
I'll need to be re-taught, some of the materials from when I was in first grade and for literacy. 
Once the teacher knows the collective levels of what they have in their room, they will be able to accommodate those literacy. 
Lessons around that art and music will be a push in again to minimize the flow, and we are currently working with our art, music departments. 
This is one that was a really tough hit. 
Music has to be 12 feet. 
Apart for any coral or any sort of wind instruments, we are working our hardest with that department. 
We are very fortunate here. 
We have a very strong music program and we do not want to see that diminish, 
and so we are looking for ways to think out of the box in order to be able to offer course opportunities that might be in smaller sections and different ways to offer lessons as well, but we have provided and are keeping all lesson areas in the elementary schools, so that students can still maintain lessons as needed. 
Physical education will be a mix of separating two classes. 
Typically, that are adjoined, so one class will be in the gym. 
One class will be outside and inclement weather they will rotate between the gym and in the classroom. 
Um, mr butel and miss mcentee have reworked their curriculum to ensure that all team sports will be done in the spring, so all of those units will be taught in the spring and in the beginning it will be more personal. 
Fitness. 
Traditional grading will also return for our students. 
While we know that there may be some interruption in terms of what model our students may have to face, where we hear rumors that we may have to go to distance learning sometime later in the fall. 
We fully believe that by using google classroom no matter what we will be able to make that seamless transition to distance learning should we need- 
and we are well prepared, as opposed to when the crisis first happened, and most school districts were really just grasping at straws, 
but we also know that the accountability is something that is very important to our students very important to our community and especially to our students who are at the high school level. 
As I said before, google classroom will be utilized for communication at both the building principle and classroom teacher level. 
We really want to make sure that parents are on one medium so that they can see any communication, email messages, lessons etc, and at this time we are going to enforce, to ensure for the safety of our staff and other students that any sort of instruction that is done on google classroom or virtually that our students adhere to our district code of conduct. 
When students this year sign on families sign on to look at schedules, they will be asked and prompted to sign off on certain measures around this 
okay. 
I just wanted to share with you some of our pictures that john 
and I took as we went around in our walkthroughs. 
These are some samples of our our elementary classrooms. 
Again, they're, not decorated, yet, of course, but you can see that we have removed a lot of the traditional. 
You know, wonderful items that we would see in a classroom, but again we really wanted to maximize space and ensure that the teacher had space in the front of where their smart boards are and then also making sure that kids had room and were not. 
You know pushed up too too much, so we still are adjusting that once every single classroom is created at the building level, we will be returning mr o'keefe and I, with our team, to just ensure that everybody has space both the teacher in the front of the room and then students around. 
So again, we are fortunate here. 
We do believe that we have enough staff to move forward and should the numbers for remote learning ensure even more flexibility. 
We may be able to open up more sections in our elementary schools and at our secondary levels, bringing back more secondary students uh. 
This is at one more of the elementary school and to the right there. 
You will see a classroom um at the secondary level. 
Um. 
This particular sample is where we marked it the a and b desks, so that students will be sitting 
and then it will make it a little bit easier for cleaning at night for our custodial staff. 
Okay. 
This is this is also a little bit of a tough share here, because I know that we've been getting a lot of questions about child care and upk. 
First, child care: we are still going to be providing am npm child care by boce by scope, educational services. 
They continue to offer right now child care throughout the pandemic for our essential workers, and they are happy to move forward to offer this services for all of our students. 
At this point, though, we are on hold for our upk program, and that is not because we don't have the space or 
we don't want to, but we simply have not received the allocations yet from the state, and that is how we are able to run our our upk program. 
While we do have many students who do a tuition based into the program, it is simply not enough to substantiate the program. 
Should we not get the allocations, so we are advising parents at this time. 
I know I've. 
I've answered many phone calls many emails if you are need, if you need care, if you would like your child to go to an alternate preschool now is the time to seek that out just to be safe. 
However, if we were to find out about the allocations tomorrow, we would also be able to implement that uh. 
You know moving forward
, so we have not changed anything we're not changing any spaces at this time, um we're just kind of on a standstill but to be safe. 
We just encourage you to look just in case. 
Excuse me, ms hines, yes 
yeah. 
Actually, since we last spoke earlier today, I spoke to mr duffy uh, he's the executive director of scope and runs our upk program just trying to see if he's heard anything further about the program 
uh and he has not heard much more than we have. 
As a matter of fact, there was a meeting earlier in the day with the suffolk county, superintendents uh, as well as mr wix who's, the regional superintendent for eastern suffolk boces, to see what boces knew about upk funding and again their contacts in albany have been very, very quiet on it. 
The only information they've received is, you know, floating a balloon from albany that they're considering opening upk up, but they may only fund it at 80 percent of what the grant would be. 
So that would mean if the district wanted to move forward. 
That would be an expense that was not budgeted for and we'd have to make a determination. 
You know to take those monies from elsewhere to support the program, so it sounds like they're getting closer to a final decision um, but I'd have to keep the border prize, so it might be a model in which we'd have to support 20 of the program to make it move forward. 
So I'll keep you posted on that. 
Thank you, mr 
o'keefe, um, 
okay and then on to now our boces cte program. 
So those are our students because we do have two. 
We have cte programs that we house ourselves. 
They will still remain on the a b schedule, but the but the bose cte programs, where students get on the bus and go to boces. 
Boces did alert us last week that they will be providing that in uh house they do have the room 
so that will be live every day and for those students 
we will still have busing from our high schools to and from the program. 
We at this time, though, say that we may need family support in terms of if your child might need a ride to school if they are going to the program in the afternoon or alternately. 
That is, that is not solidified. 
Mr o'keefe and mr savone are looking at that through transportation to see if we might be able to accommodate and pick up individual students at their homes. 
That would only be for those choosing remote learning right. 
Only those choosing remotely. 
Thank you, okay, uh. 
So here I just. 
I share the hyperlinks that you will see on um on the presentation that that we've sent home uh for the sake of time, I'm not going to go through all of these links, but the top is a sample of our health screening form and the bottom of our all the protocol visuals a sample of them that we have smattered around every single building and so for our next steps. 
As we said this morning, we finished our planning committee meeting where we laid out the the final steps here with our district leaders and our volunteers. 
Our board of education, pres presentation is, is now as you can see, and then we also have a live community forum on monday at seven o'clock and we will be uh live streaming it. 
Similarly here, however, I would envision that we would be a little closer that so that you can see us a little bit more clear um, but on friday we will be sending out a survey just asking community members for questions that they have. 
We will collate those into subject areas and we will look to our best answer. 
Any questions that you have as well as our building administration will be delivering a common q, a sort of like fact sheet about further details pertaining to to the buildings, and this will include sample schedules for all of our students- orientations how those will go out for our grade six on our grade nine. 
Some of that will be virtual and some of that will still be activities just broken up into smaller increments at the building, as well as arrival and dismissal times and bell schedules for secondary students and then, lastly, as governor cuomo had ordered on friday, we are in the process of updating our district website for protocols for any symptomatic individuals testing. 
We are not responsible per se for testing ourselves, but we are responsible for offering a plan. 
Should a student or a staff member go home, they are required to go, get testing where that could occur, and then, of course, they can't come back into school until testing results have been provided and then contact tracing as well. 
Okay. 
So that is the end of our presentation this evening. 
We look forward to speaking and sharing some more and clarifying more for you, as the rest of the night goes on and then on monday, as well at seven o'clock. 
Did 
I oh my apologies. 
Let me go back. 
I 
I didn't realize that I think I got caught up in what we were saying about upk before um, so my apologies. 
These are some additional details about our secondary return and again uh, with the utmost priority being the social and emotional well-being of our students. 
In grades. 
Six to eight we will be benchmarking for eli. 
We do that through a literacy management system that we have and also for math. 
All of our math departments have benchmarking type assessments that they do in the beginning of the year and again this will be to identify present learning levels in grades, seven to 12 curriculum adjustments may be made for applicable areas where prior learning needs to be had so, for example, in our math and our science classes, there may need to be some learning from the prior year's regents bearing class, and so we would be looking to look at curriculum around that and possibly offer review classes for our students as well again, traditional grading will return. 
Students may not share, so we will be limiting textbook use 
and we'll be taking advantage of all of the online subscriptions that we have physical education again. 
Very much like elementary school will be a mix of the gym outside fields and other large area 
use instrumental lessons very similar to elementary. 
We are working with that department to ensure that lessons will occur. 
They do need to be 12 feet if they are wind and or choral in nature, and again we will be looking to figure out ways in order to still offer those choral groups, but in a modified version google classroom will continue to be utilized for communication with both the principal and the classroom teacher again for a seamless transition should we ever be ordered into distance learning. 
Lockers will mostly be used for am and pickup 
only that's not to say that if a student really needed to go back, we would not allow them to, but again just trying to minimize the flow and minimize how much our students are putting into the lockers. 
So we would envision some form of outerwear
, that's appropriate for that time and uh modified or or very 
um. 
You know slight binders and or folders notebooks that they need um stagger grades again in times of at the end of the period. 
We would be announcing uh grades so that they can come out into the hallways, so that would mean that we would be um at the end of the period starting it a little bit earlier, so that we can allow each grade level to disperse into the hallway to their next period. 
Okay, sorry about that um. 
So that still is the end of our presentation um. 
We hope that this did clarify some further information for you. 
We are appreciative of the support and the time that the community offered us to be able to digest everything and wait for the orders, so we can bring this to you tonight. 
Thank you. 
Questions from the board questions from the board. 
Is anybody, jim, a john on the upk uh right now? 
The way that's funded is uh. 
Correct me. 
If I'm wrong, like a six hundred thousand dollar grant, primarily we get a six hundred thousand dollar grant. 
We hold a lottery that allots 252 families a spot in the program we have more interest than that annually, but families beyond the 253 are able to participate for the same rate, which is about twenty four hundred dollars per family for the year 
okay. 
So if, if the governor uh would give us 80 percent of that, that would mean that the district would have to come up with a hundred and twenty thousand dollars correct. 
But are you in that hundred twenty thousand dollars? 
Are we counting that that the lottery people are not paying tuition? 
That would still be the lottery people not paying right, so, in other words, the 120 000 could be reduced if the lottery people were willing to pay a tuition fee. 
Yes, that was a model the board chose to go with. 
Yes, okay, thank you just to figure back on what security was saying if they were to um to to uh. 
Take twenty percent of that uh we'd be looking at about 479 thousand. 
Two hundred is what we'll be looking at, which is what accommodate 201 kids. 
You were saying that you were concerned that we, we might not be able to raise the funds to be able to. 
You know, manage the program and have enough you know what 
yeah 
I mean. 
You'd have to redo the lottery. 
Then I I wouldn't I don't know. 
If would necessity, would you want to use the same number then cut it off? 
Well, I set off at just 201 
and then and then open it up at 237.69 per per family per month. 
We could examine any model that the board wanted to take a look at 
yeah. 
Certainly those other families had already been notified that they were among the families chosen for the free program. 
That's the worst. 
The worst case scenario would be correct, but let's say they take all the funding and, and they don't and one of the concerns to have it 
I mean have we thought about reaching out to some of our state elected officials, flanagan or uh doug smith, to find out if they can get us clarification from the governor's office as to whether or not he's going to fight 
yeah
, we can certainly continue to reach out. 
Quite honestly, during much of this crisis, much of them have been rather silent. 
We haven't been able to get a lot of information. 
The governor isn't sharing much with other people other than when he decides to put it out via press conference, I mean. 
Normally, our local representatives are very helpful in getting information for us. 
Unfortunately, hadn't been able to get information for us, but it's certainly worth trying. 
I mean we're two weeks before the start of school 
and you've got 252 families, not knowing whether or not they have a 
pre-k yeah. 
I mean I don't know, you know how the board feels, but 
I personally think that you would get 252 families, even if they took all 599 000, because at 237 a month for half day pre-k, it's still a great great opportunity sure- 
and I can't and now more than ever and and would be willing to work with us if there was zero funding 
and we had enough participation to still run the program. 
Yes would can we include something like that in the survey sits some of the families out there to see what the interests would be. 
We could do a separate survey. 
I wouldn't want to you know not on the same survey. 
Yeah put it out as a separate survey, specifically targeted to those families that are already in the process. 
I have a follow-up to that. 
Where are we putting all these students if our classes are maxed out at this time we still have not reappropriated those classes. 
We do have a couple of buildings because of additional special education sections that we needed, that we moved the classes, but we have not taken away those class spaces. 
Yet so, if we were to go with the will of the board to you know, put out a survey and go with a tuition base, we would be you know all set to go: hi hi uh. 
I just had a quick question um about the bus and what is the busing going to look like I mean again
, it'll also depend on participation. 
You know we put out a survey to the parents uh a week or so ago. 
I think we had nine thousand respondents in in very brief order. 
Um in that survey about a third of the families uh considered, possibly keeping their children home um of the two-thirds willing to send their children in 65 of those said they would use the bus. 
The other 35 said they would drive their children to school um. 
So just some quick, math you're only looking at say, 4 500, 
kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers. 
I mean they could change when we put out the new survey um, and it could be that you know parents first stop that they don't want to use the bus and then during the year. 
Maybe they start. 
You know they need the bus um. 
So we're not reducing the number of bus runs. 
All the runs that have been budgeted for would be running um, but with those numbers you'd end up literally with just about one child per seat. 
You know so 
and then you also take into account 
remote 
yeah 
you'll get routed for 44 students. 
So in the worst case scenario there could be two pupils in each seat, but based on the information we're receiving, I don't think there'll be that participation. 
Okay, just um some clarification so with the custodial staff cleaning each night, so 
they're going to have more to do than they did prior. 
Have we increased the custodial staff since their job description will be different to do a more deeper cleaning every day daily versus 
yeah. 
Unfortunately, that was one of the items that was pulled back on the budget, so obviously we may need to take a look at that again we were rating 10 custodians uh and then, 
when there was issues where we even today, we still don't know what our state funding is um and we still have the potential of a looming. 
20 percent cut 
um, we decided um. 
If you remember back to january and february, we were talking about this. 
We were adding one extra custodian, each building right um. 
That was one of our enhancements for this year's budget. 
We did draw that back um, so we're going to work with the staff. 
We have work with the substitute staff we have, and you know man it as best as possible to optimize cleaning, 
okay 
and then um with the uh secondary schools, where you have the a b desks next to each other. 
So that means, if I am an a student and I sit in only the a 
and then the next day, the b desk comes in. 
That image might change, though I was going to say that that was really more so that we can show a visual to the families, how we were spacing it out in the beginning, 
those desks we would see needing to be reappropriated and put into our our lunchrooms different other areas where we're going to need to reappropriate other space, the library different items like that um. 
So I don't. 
I don't necessarily think we were just at north today and in the classrooms that we walked around in with miss trombetta. 
There was only about 15 to 16 desks in in each classroom: 
okay 
yeah. 
That was an initial setup when we were trying to figure out what it would look like or how we could divide them up. 
But in fact, with the style of cafeteria tables, we have it. 
It really prohibits the number of children that can eat in the cafeteria. 
We believe we're going to take all the cafeteria tables out of those secondary cafeterias and store them and put in desks. 
I mean it's not going to be the most attractive. 
Lunchroom it'll be set up more like a testing room where children will be spaced six feet apart right with classroom desks correct, but we do anticipate that we would be able to offer breaks, for you know, students to be able to go outside and go into any of the recreation areas, 
items like that elimination and so then um in the secondary schools. 
If the kids are um changing classrooms um will the desk get wiped down between each change or how does that work in the cafeteria? 
Yes, yes, okay, not in the classrooms that would that would technically be not possible. 
I mean there's 3 000 desks in high school and 1600 or so in in a middle school. 
That just wouldn't be the means in that four or five minutes of passing to wipe down those tables. 
But if we student would want to do their own destiny, the materials will be in the classroom right. 
We are providing that for every classroom. 
Okay 
and then one last question. 
Sorry, everybody! 
It's okay! 
If a staff or a student happens to test positive, that would then be reported, and then the cdc would guide us on what we had to do like or we have our own plan. 
How does that work? 
The department of health, the department of health department of health? 
So they would tell us like so if it's one student in one classroom 
right that may be different than a student in a middle school who passes through a hall or mrs clayton's, become an expert on the matter. 
Okay, so the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require us to make reports for certain things and they require the medical treatment provider. 
The doctor who's performed the diagnosis for a positive result to report information to reporting for contact tracing. 
So therefore, our obligation we go above and beyond to make sure that, even if, for some reason, the medical treatment provider has not contacted the contact tracing, we will just check you know belt and suspenders that we have provided some insight in case 
there's an instance. 
The other thing is when the lab results come back. 
The lab results are um supposed to be also provided to the contact tracing, at which point the department of health would be uh or enter cdc would be contacting tracers and determining who they would contact, including students or staff or family or whoever they came into contact with. 
Can I can I pick you back on that question quick? 
Yes, thank you very much so on the checklist that we do daily. 
Let's just say rob 
and I are in a classroom 
and I find out that he test positive for covid the next day when my parents are filling out the check sheet and it says, have you come in contact with anybody? 
That's tested positive? 
Will that prevent my entrance into the building? 
If you're saying you tested positive 
yeah, 
if you're saying you're tested right? 
No, I mean, like I'm, not gonna, tell you that rob testifies we're not allowed to tell you 
I mean I came to learn it. 
It becomes common knowledge of who it was 
yeah, 
and now I have to honestly fill out the sheet 
yeah 
I mean I'm have to now have to say. 
Yes, I did come into contact with some of the department of health guidelines for close contact, and this is where it gets a little squirrelly because you know, are we in close contact? 
Are we in close contact? 
Their criteria for close contact is less than six feet for 15 minutes or more um, so we'll have to look at each of those one at a time, and I can foresee the department of health as soon as schools open, you know, becoming overwhelmed with calls from districts all around the state um just trying to get feedback and answers, so we're building criteria and protocols with our nursing staff with our personnel staff. 
You know, so we can make some of these decisions on our own. 
We have handled situations already, even during summer school programs. 
So it's not that we're unfamiliar with how to do it. 
We've had staff members with with covid um, so it's just going to be on a bigger scale. 
Now, that's all, and also just to mention, mr block is with us this evening from ingram and smith. 
He has been our one of our main contacts that we've been triaging information between the state, the federal, what we have in our schools, what we can do and what we can't do and trying to find the best scenario for our students and our staff 
and we'll continue to do so, and I promise this is my last question. 
So if a parent chooses the remote learning, yes, they have to commit to that for the year. 
They can't change their mind like after the first marking period, they're committing to that 
and then their student um cannot participate in, let's say spring sports, no, so um, I think in in the beginning of the guidance, it said that students may not be able to may not be able to um enter into activities or sports. 
We know now that that is not the case and that if a child is remote, they're still a student of ours, we're not really going to have any activities. 
So we don't foresee that being an issue. 
So it's really more for sports, but miss trombetta who sits on uh. 
The community. 
Four section has shared with us um information in terms of how they're looking at that language and how we would not be prohibited most likely from keeping children back from sports in september, and then the child plays a spring sport and then come the spring. 
Sports are up and running and you tell the child they can't play, and please just know that when we write that we're looking to make it more of a commitment that could be up to a year. 
That is because we don't want to give the misnomer that if a child says well, I want you know a family to say that they want to be remote in a week 
and then they change their mind. 
They want to do it another week. 
We will look at each case, but it would be very challenging for us to bring back large numbers of students who think who feel they might have made a poor choice, because that would shift all of our classrooms and all of our teaching staff. 
No, I would totally agree with that. 
I just didn't know if it would be like after every marking period reevaluated, but if the parent does commit, I just don't want to hurt the student of course by saying. 
If um extracurricular comes back in spring, your parent made this choice in september, and now you can't participate right and- 
and I think for us, you know being just uh of mine- that things could shift very easily. 
We could look to look at that come january 
and it may not need to be a year-long commitment, but we did want to write it down so that parents were aware all right. 
Thank you very much. 
Thank you for sharing this with us 
yeah. 
I have two questions or concerns um. 
When this plan was developed to return to school k through five the ada b day, it wasn't based on surveys that went out as to the number of parents that think they would choose remote or not choose remote. 
It was based on our entire population. 
Yes, so conceivably, if we have a um, a 6 through 12 model of a day b day, hypothetically every parent said, I want my kids to return to school. 
We can. 
We can accommodate all of them in an ajb day. 
You mean physically back into school. 
No, we wouldn't be able to do that. 
How would we physically bring them all back? 
We don't have so at the elementary level, just very simple, math right. 
We have to take out about five to six, seven kids out of each classroom in order to be able to accommodate that average size. 
My question a little bit on the six through twelve model- uh-huh
, okay, it that was based upon returning every single child to school. 
So if friday, the survey is if we have if we have more children now I understand you. 
Thank you. 
So if we have more children who are going to be on remote, we could conceivably- 
and I know we discussed this this morning in our committee- 
we could look to bring back more uh students. 
My question is that my concern is the same as laura is having a one-year commitment. 
I received a half a dozen phone calls today, um, probably in the last couple hours about I'm concerned about the one-year commitment we know. 
Okay, that you know in remote learning it says remote instruction is not equivalent to in-person hybrid instruction right
, so it's not the same level right so for forcing kids out of school. 
What we're doing is we're creating a bigger educational gap for the following year. 
Well, we're not forcing that would be a parent's choice, but 
the thing is we allow them to come back after each quarter. 
Okay, if we're able to accommodate them according to the way the plan was designed. 
Why wouldn't we allow them come back after after one quarter, so they can get that? 
I didn't think we said that we wouldn't be allowing we said that it would be really prohibitive for us to be able to reschedule them back into classrooms, but we could look at it based on the numbers that we have. 
We wanted to be honest, mr scavo, and let families know that this could be a year-long commitment, and most districts are looking at that at either january or the year long, because it is very disruptive that would mean having to up just move around the entire schedule for um. 
You know our schools, which we may still have to do, should covert restrictions be lifted, but you wouldn't want to recant, and we know that that happened quite a bit where, in the beginning of all this debacle, we were putting out information 
and then something you know, alternatively, was shared, but I think we just said before with miss slattery, that, of course, if we could look at it by quarter and we felt like it wasn't going to be a tremendous feat for our families that we would do that. 
But I think that that's not probably what a parent is going to make their choice on if I'm choosing to be remote. 
It's because I'm thinking that it's unsafe for my child to be at school. 
So I'm hoping that by these presentation, slides that we have 
people will see that we've made tremendous tremendous um. 
You know strides in making sure that our schools are safe, they're, clean and we're doing routine protocols to ensure that, but the commitment is a year. 
That's what this time for right! 
Now! 
Yes, so if something changes at home uh a person, that's furloughed now has to go back to work right, they want to and their their impression is going to be that they can't return because they signed the paper saying that they have a one-year commitment to be at 
yeah. 
But I mean I think, though um if, if there's something along those lines- 
and we all get those calls all the time, if there's a family, that really is in enough need and feels like they made the poor choice or not a poor choice. 
They made the wrong choice for what their their thing is. 
Going on right now, so whether a parent goes back, furloughed or their child is just not doing well in remote learning and they were to contact us just like any other parent phone call that we would have. 
Of course, we would look at every case individually, but I'm talking as a whole. 
We could not say you're going to be a remote 
and then, if you choose to decide in masses that you want to come back, we just would not be able to run the same schedule 
and then we would be restarting everything over again. 
The reason why I bring this up is: I watched the the newsday webinar yesterday 
uh we had dr johnson. 
I finally heard all about him. 
I got a chance to see him in the presentation, along with a psychiatrist along with a the superintendent of north babylon, and that exact question came up right and a lot of the experts were saying. 
I would not go past a semester. 
In fact, a lot of districts are going quarterly, you know- 
and I just don't. 
I just don't want to influence a person's decision because they're fearful that, if they sign that paper they're not going to be able to come back because the reality of it is
, is that you know when we look at the education of even a day b day. 
My concern is that, as a teacher, you can't teach the entire curriculum and now we're talking about prior learning being re-taught from the previous year, how you and you're never going to be able to teach the the entire curriculum, but the kids that at home that are not getting the same. 
Equivalency of education are going to be further behind the following year and which all we're going to do is create a a snowball effect and that's my concern. 
I mean you know I personally would like you know the opportunity that, if they, if they come back after, if they're the first quarter, which is a 10-week period or nine-week period, I think it would be a little more settling for the people in the community um. 
Knowing that all right, this remote's not learning I committed to a year now, I'm stuck well
, I mean, I think I think two things right, because I agree with you. 
I don't think anybody wants to be in the position where we can't welcome back students interchangeably as they need, and we definitely know that, no matter what happens. 
Curriculum is going to be interrupted this year. 
That is a safe bet right, but if we play, if it's the will of the board, if it's the will of the board to change that- 
and you would like to make that language more flexible, we're happy to do that. 
But please know that we've taken, you know quite a concealed amount of time to making sure we would prefer our students not to be on remote, 
but if a family really chooses and needs to choose that we honor and we respect that absolutely um. 
But yes, I mean nobody wants to do that, but nobody's the size of sagem either, and so we have different restrictions. 
That's why the question was the plan design based on the entire um it was. 
It was based on of if all students were going to be a full return, then we would have to go in an a b day if we are finding, though, that we have remote students at a quantity where we can bring back students even an additional day or or by grade level seniors. 
First, ninth graders. 
First, you know. 
However, we look to plan through that. 
Then that's would be our next step. 
So just like what we were saying earlier in our remote instruction um, it's going to be hard to match up what exactly the model will look like until we have the survey results from our teachers and for our families, so we can match it up certification-wise. 
My biggest concern is we have kids taking ap exams and getting those kids ready for that and getting those kids ready for the next level college 
yeah. 
You know we. 
We have training as much face time with with staff. 
It's absolutely. 
I agree with you 
and I'm very 
I'm very thankful uh. 
You know working with the scta if we ever have to think about distance learning the fact that we'll be providing two and a half hours every day for our students so running the same schedule, just shortened periods. 
You know working on google classroom interchangeably now and consistently across all of our classrooms. 
You know just right now. 
Currently we have a tremendous amount of teachers that are undergoing pd, virtually to ensure that everything is is up and running and that they feel clarified and supported in that kind of work, but you're preaching to the choir. 
I couldn't agree with you more that this is a really challenging time. 
I have a high schooler myself 
and she's in a smaller district, doing an a b schedule um. 
So I scratch my head a lot right now, so 
I I completely respect and understand and if the board would like us to look at the year-long date, please just let us know 
and we'd be happy to accommodate. 
No, this this will go the uh, remote learning actually just went out. 
That survey just went out, but we can I mean I could send it on on. 
On remind in five minutes, if we wanted to say you know that we've changed the date um, but it sounds like. 
Maybe that needs to be more of a discussion if we're looking to go that route meredith engine and then jimmy so on the remote learning. 
If a parent were to choose that model um, I understand that we would want them to commit for the full year, because we are devoting staff just to that remote learning right 
we're not using a teacher who may be inside the classroom, sometimes we're going to utilize the staff that, for whatever reason, has to be staying at home to be our remote teachers. 
That's the optimal plan right, so at the elementary level um, it works a little bit easier in that in that fashion. 
If I'm an elementary teacher and I'm out, I can conceivably teach any of those grade levels 
if I'm a librarian, obviously that certification, et cetera et cetera, it gets a little trickier at the secondary level, because if I'm a chemistry, teacher 
and 
and I'm out- 
and maybe I don't have as many students out for chemistry- 
you know- 
then what am I giving to that teacher in terms of work that they would be doing for that day. 
So one could say that she would switch what they're doing 
and now they're going to teach more science electives and they can support any of those students who are out needing science electives. 
So it's really going to boil down to looking at the hard numbers of students matched up with the teachers that we have. 
Should we not be able to match everybody up which 
I'm hopeful we will be able to, then we would need to start entering into some sort of live streaming or larger groups of google classrooms, where a teacher, instead of having a class of maybe 25 or 26 in a google classroom, we may have to have larger numbers, and 
so then that's why the year-long decision, or not doing it every quarter becomes very challenging for us. 
If I'm a teacher 
and I'm running a google classroom of 45 kids and 
now some that those classrooms want to go back
, what classroom are they going into? 
Where am I fitting them into 
so then you're having to change people's schedule? 
It's a lot of moving parts, it is and then, if um, so we have 
so children are able to through their parents, choose whether they want to come back to school or not. 
Our teachers are not electing whether they're coming back to school. 
The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning are the teachers that have um reasons why they cannot return, and so, even if tomorrow, you know three weeks after school started, all of our remote learners said well. 
This is for the birds. 
I don't like this. 
I want to go back to school. 
We wouldn't then have the ability to bring them back, because, even though we did the classrooms for them, we wouldn't at that point, have the ability. 
Would we well not at this time, because again, with six feet, we are, you know down to the amount of numbers that we have, 
but if, if our numbers look as such, where um the remote learning is um a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms, let's say, for example, instead of them being 17, that might only be 13 or 14. 
So then we could start welcoming them back, but that would be based on almost you know, looking at each student individually and being able to see how we can schedule them back into school, which is probably a very physical impossibility in the next three weeks. 
It's a little hard 
yeah 
um with our secondary schools um as a as a secondary mom. 
It is it it kind of does stink 
and there's no two ways about it: our children, no child, is going to get the best education this year. 
It's just not going to happen and something we're going to try our best 
yeah 
we'll. 
Definitely try our best right um. 
If one, let's say somerset had an influx of you know. 
80 percent of their kids wanted to stay home and remote learn that would open up a lot more room, but it wouldn't necessarily mean that we would do somerset where their children win every single day and the rest of them. 
No, we would be making decisions that are consistent for all students, but then we might be reappropriating staff to help out in um other ways in other areas, and I don't want to put you on the spot, but it's okay. 
That's why we're here 
we're on the spot? 
Have we looked into sixth grade at all, because in my opinion sixth grade is that lost grade? 
It's a grade where they're a little too young to still stay home by themselves and not only just stay home for the day by themselves, but also teach themselves kind of you know get on 
this get on the schedule 
get on the computer. 
Do what you got to do? 
Keep yourself moving on that b day. 
Have we visited something that once we get all our numbers, because I know we can't really finalize anything until we get all these surveys and numbers, but once we get all those numbers, are we going to be able to maybe look at sixth grade going every day as a possibility? 
Yeah, that's absolutely you know
, that's definitely a conversation that we've been having as as soon as we know what the numbers are. 
Will we be able to welcome back additional grades, and I would I would assume that we would be having these conversations with with all of you, our administrative team, obviously as well um and sixth grade is one of those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off at um, because we know that they could be 10 11 years old going into school, and I would not feel comfortable myself at times, leaving my child home for long periods, um, and so yes, we've had those conversations and once we know the numbers we'll be able to come back and report if we're able to make any changes good. 
Thank you. 
So much, no problem, just a quick question. 
Some clarification! 
Yes, um piggybacking a little bit on what mr scavo said. 
Are we entering the year making an assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver 100 of content in regards to secondary curriculum? 
If that is the assumption that I think you said that we're almost entering into um, 
I mean who's going to choose what topics and what's being covered. 
Are we letting different teachers different people it just it concerns me that we're entering, 
I know, there's no perfect answer and there's no scenario that can right that, under these uh circumstances that you've, given you 
but um. 
I guess that makes more of mr scala's point is that if we're making the assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver content, we should be trying to uh wait till so many surveys come back and see how many kids we can actually get yeah 
and um. 
So no right, I don't have a perfect answer for it, but I can tell you what we're doing to set up for that um. 
I had a chair meeting a couple of weeks ago, so our instructional leaders in each department to talk about that, especially at the secondary level, and so we would be looking at our curriculum at what are the big ideas at the end of the school year. 
What is it that the students are expected to learn so they can um. 
You know move forward and pass those classes and or regence exams, we're also hoping to have a little bit more guidance in terms of the state education department in terms of what they're going to do in relaxing standards and curriculum and testing so much in like how they had canceled the regents. 
We don't hope for that. 
We hope more for choice so that these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents. 
If they want to take it and see what kind of grade they get um, I don't, I don't think we're looking. 
I don't think- 
and I know 
you mean it this way, but we're not assuming we're not going to be able to get through our curriculum, but we want to be real with our families. 
The curriculum could look a little bit different than what it normally does, and I know our teachers again hard workers are already looking at that. 
We've had some conversation, for example around science lab hours, usually that's seat time 
now the state education department has relaxed that, and that could be also a virtual. 
So we've already started those conversations once we come back into. 
Schools in our department means that we've been having anyway, virtually we'll continue those talks and start looking at that together. 
So this at the secondary level state the new york state, creates the standards for apn regions 
right so haven't. 
Given us clarification, okay well, ap is through uh is through the college board, and so we actually are, starting, as you know, uh a new ap capstone program at the high school, so those teachers that um are gonna begin teaching it for us this year they just went through the training for that 
and right now, ap is holding tight to what they're doing, but we also know that at the last minute they made some changes around what they did: testing wise, virtually um. 
So we are advocating- 
and I think mr o'keefe spoke about this earlier- while we have not heard a tremendous amount from our legislators at this time we have been advocating, through our local boces, our associations talking to talking to the college board and just hoping for some teamwork for relief, so that families know that you know we're not looking to make any decisions that are going to make impacts for the students, but we also have to be real and they have to work with us. 
So we're hopeful for that. 
No problem, aaron, the so by the weekend we will have uh the figures on how many people are opting for remote learning. 
Is that, yes, all right and the way we have it now is uh they're being committed. 
They can make a commitment for one full year, uh just just for my identification. 
Let's suppose it came back to say 30 percent of our district, one, which could be right, which could be what it could be sure. 
What does that change? 
Anything uh for us with the ab days or or or as meredith said, the sixth grade situation would, let's say, 30 remote for the year. 
Would that change uh? 
You know what we're doing right now. 
Yes, absolutely so like what I just said with business. 
Also gonna take you know. 
Where is the thirty percent 
yeah? 
It could be heavily weighted on the younger children. 
Right, you know, is a k12 pet families deciding they want to keep them home right. 
You know it really depends on the breakdown of the of the groupings and the grades of where that 30 percent is or is it leaning more on one side of the district versus the other uh, it's not as clean as just if it was thirty percent, but yes, spaced across the district. 
That would make it easier. 
We can see some movement, I'm just not sure that I could say for sure right now that it would be at the secondary level. 
We would just need to see where it is and just aggregate that and just look at it, and it also boils down to to you know certification areas too, as well. 
How much staff we have in um in each area? 
I fully understand mr scala's position on that. 
I really do understand, but I'm trying to trying to look at this, as if you put out a survey tonight which is already gone, but if you put it out- 
and it said your one mocking period 
and you could change your mind, then kind of I would say that you really 
we're stuck with what we've got this is. 
This is the way it's got to be because you don't know from market period of marketing period, how many students you're going to have. 
Is that accurate? 
Well yeah 
I mean, 
but, but that goes to back to what we said. 
We can't put out there that you can make the decision after each quarter. 
If we're not sure we're going to be able to offer that- 
and so I know it may have looked like it- was a little bit stricter than it sounds like the board was- was willing to move forward with 
and so again we're certainly open to putting in alternate language, and we could send it as as quick as you know, as soon as we're done here or first thing in the morning. 
I certainly don't want to prohibit anybody from not doing remote learning 
but um again, it's it's. 
We have to be practical in the size of our school district, so we can't say we're going to be able to offer things that smaller school districts can right away, but it is prohibitive based on on the numbers. 
So, yes, we might be able to offer that and we might be able to offer more grades into our secondary schools. 
We might be able to offer more space for our elementary students. 
We just won't know until we see all of those numbers getting to getting that number that we're seeking this weekend will drive uh where we go next, yes, and that's why it's challenging to be able to share with our staff and 
with our community what remote learning will you know essentially look like as well? 
If I don't have enough staff, I can't guarantee that you're going to be in a google classroom with a live teacher. 
I might not be able to offer that it may be based on whatever elective or store or grade that you're in it could be some sort of like a live streaming, but 
but again it really. 
It depends on on the numbers of the students that we have uh up against our staff as well. 
Thank you, jim just just real fast to pick it back. 
I apologize. 
I walked out for a second, if only 75 of the families respond to the survey. 
So now there's 25 of the kids. 
We don't know what they're doing no the default is that they're coming to school. 
Okay, yeah! 
Thank you no problem, so 
I know with elementary the teachers. 
Usually take their lunch when the students have their lunch. 
How are we working that, if they're having a lunch in the classroom who will be supervising them so uh? 
We do have obviously aid support. 
We are also working with our principals because we know that we're probably going to need some additional help with that um, but we also um know that uh. 
You know that lunch is managed um. 
I actually thought that there was some staff that was a part of the lunch periods that might be mistaken. 
Yeah I'd have to look at that um, but we are. 
We are having conversation to ensure that we have um the support we need for lunch, two more. 
Actually. 
What will clubs look like virtually? 
So that's 
that's another new and exciting uh question right. 
We definitely know that clubs are not going to be able to be maintained after school physically. 
We have started to work with an online platform called passport for good and it allows clubs to run virtually and note on all their activities attendance community service hours if a child is working any of those types of hours. 
So we have to enter into conversation with our teachers about what that could look like. 
We certainly don't want to not offer clubs, but you know once a week twice a week: what sort of activities? 
How will you meet with them? 
Will google me be a part of it? 
Those are the questions that we're looking to have moving forward around clubs and one more with the staggered start times. 
Those are students still changing for gym class. 
We will not be changing for gym and we will not need to because we have moved team sports to the end and we're looking to do more um. 
You know personal fitness that isn't rigorous, but no we would not. 
We would not be looking to have any any uh. 
You know contact in that manner for our students 
[Music]. As I sat here tonight. 
I thought about saying absolutely nothing 
and I really don't know where to begin. 
I don't have a specific question. 
I can tell you that I'm incredibly angry internally right now 
uh and it's not at anybody in this room, but I thought that uh, I haven't organized my thoughts completely they're. 
Just bouncing around in my head, but I want to say a few things. 
First, I want to say that you did an outstanding job in the most difficult of circumstances. 
You've put together a plan. 
Every school district is in the same exact boat that we are in questions asked tonight by rob, alex laura meredith uh everybody here great questions, uh and we don't have the answers to any of those questions and we are going to be surprised. 
I think greatly by the things that we find. 
I think that you know people could look at what's going on here tonight and they may think that all of us agree on this model and think that this is what we have to do. 
I'm sure there are people watching this tonight streaming or 
we'll watch it later on 
and they'll think that if you're sitting here, I'm sitting here 
and I'm quiet that I must agree with this plan- 
and I think it's wonderful 
and I'm going to tell you that I do
n't it's rotten, it's a rotten plan. 
That's going to do tremendous damage to our children. 
I've been teaching for over 22 years. 
Now I can remember when I started there was goals 2000., maybe some people in the room. 
Remember that maybe you don't, then there was no child left behind and then most recently there was common core there's, never a time in which it seems like a bad idea, 
can't come about a bunch of garbage and nonsense that does anything but improves the education of our children. 
As I sat here tonight and I watch that slideshow 
and I watch those desks sitting so far apart. 
I thought what kind of dystopian period of time have we entered into where we look at this, and we accept this as the quote-unquote, what I hate to say the new normal, it's not normal to me. 
It's not acceptable to me. 
I want you to know that if it were up to me solely, I would defy the governor. 
I would send all of our children back to back to school. 
I would give them that opportunity. 
I believe that his edicts are completely unrealistic in terms of delivering a sound education to our children and I believe they are not well-based in terms of research and data and so on. 
So when we look at how many children have ended up with covid and what's happened to them, there's no question that covet exists. 
In my mind, I lost one friend to it. 
I almost lost a second several who had it very badly who thought they might lose their lives. 
So there's no question that covet exists. 
However, when I look at the numbers and when I look at children getting covered, what I see is that our response is disproportionate to what is going on and we are willing to just fall in line and listen to the leadership of this state, this country and do these things- 
and I know there are people who feel like me, and I know there are people who don't feel like me, a third of the survey respondents who have said I'm not comfortable sending my child to school, and I am all about parental choice. 
If you do not feel comfortable sending your child to school, then I encourage you not to I encourage you to homeschool. 
I encourage you to use the remote option if you're not comfortable with that. 
However, I feel, like I've, been denied my choice, which is to send my child to school. 
I'm willing to tolerate that risk based upon what I know, because I think that the damage being done to my child that still is in in school and the damage being done to other children is tremendous. 
I taught remotely for the last what three four months of school 
and when I tell you that I did as good of a job as anyone could do with live instruction every single day. 
All right. 
I worked very hard to do what I did and I watched kids slide into the great abyss and some of those children that I watched slide are supposed to go off. 
The princeton this fall are supposed to go to. 
Cornell are supposed to go to uh. 
You know you name the school 
and 
and they're going columbia 
and so on uh. 
But yet I've watched each one of them slip 
and I've watched a few hold on, 
and I've watched the most needy students that I taught completely slip
, we're not getting that back. 
We are not, and here we are and here's where we're going 
so I'll leave on this particular note. 
Sometimes it's real easy to just go along 
and I feel terrible for people like you, folks, the administration here
, it's simple and I'm in the same boat as an educator. 
It's my job! 
It's how I support my family and live my life and as a result of that, I'm forced to comply, because if I don't I'm out of a job but the solutions, we've come up with they're, not good solutions, they're, terrible solutions, and they are solutions that are going to harm each and every one of our children. 
And at some point I do believe that people who feel the way that I feel are going to have to think long and hard about how we stand up and demand what we want for our children that we think is best. 
I just want to say before I ask my last two questions that was well said bill. 
I I feel exactly the same. 
We do so well said um. 
I just want to talk about um the boces, because we're also feeling some questions today about boces um. 
As I mentioned earlier in the meeting community meeting where there was only 50 people in that meeting, um, where there was only 50 people, there was 50 how many people 50 volunteers 
and then all of our staff as well 
yeah go ahead. 
Um, you know. 
Having worked for boces for going into my 29th year, you know over the decades things change school districts go to block schedule. 
Kings park did at one point: um school districts for financial purposes, decided that you know we don't want to send two bus routes to boces. 
We only want to have one route and, as a result, okay, they basically said to our agency look whirly standing in the am this year, or will he sending seniors in the am and juniors in the pm and they've changed things so that it accommodated him and 
our bosses always accommodated him and my concern with some of the questions with some of the students that are in cte classes, that are that are scheduled to go to carpentry and auto body, and- 
and you know whatever other programs they signed up for- is that transportation becomes an issue if we have an a day b day, um those particular subject areas you have to be there every day you can't teach somebody how to sand the fender and paint it remotely. 
It's just not something that can happen, so I suggested earlier that maybe we should call boces, uh eastern south post and say look we pay anywhere from 14 to 20 000 tuition depending on the particular student. 
If they have an iep or not or if they need additional services um, we can only stand in the am because of the situation. 
We're in you know and get their feedback. 
You know, I don't believe we. 
I don't think they want to lose the tuition 
yeah. 
No, I agree and and uh- 
and you know I did appreciate that idea, because I'm not I 
I know you're in western 
but um it was just you know, shared with us, the model that they were running, 
and so we traditionally we're share 
we're told what our schedule is, but we are quite large and I agree with you- 
we pay an exorbitant amount of money into both season. 
It's certainly worth the conversation. 
The second thing we have in-house cte classes where we have cosmetology um, yes and- 
and you know using the same concept- 
I mean if we have to get uh our kids there every single day. 
The suggestion that you know we've we've done in you know boces is that we try to allocate you know: 
uh the junior students first year, students 
the am session this way they could take that bus up every single day right and just have to get a ride home two two days out of the week 
and then the pm students or the second year. 
Students would actually attend cosmetology and pm because many of them may have driver's license and license um. 
It's just another suggestion to be able to accommodate that population of kids. 
That really need to be there five days a week, especially cosmetology students that have licensing and all that stuff which, by the way our cosmetology teacher, I mean she. 
She really just went above and beyond to ensure that the kids had the experience they needed, even if it was virtually. 
So I agree with you 
and I do appreciate uh that feedback 
and then just the last thing is more of a more of a comment 
and it's frustrating because I I hear what bill saying I hear 
and if you don't mind, I really do uh. 
Mr coggins, I uh. 
I don't want you to think or anybody to think that we just you know, laid low because of our jobs. 
Um. 
I think everybody knows I came from a district where we stood very tall against things that were coming down from the state education department. 
I think when you're talking about health, it's a little bit challenging, but I hope you understand- 
and I hope everyone in the community knows that at no point did. 
I think that I was doing this just because it was my job 
but because I really do want what's best for children like. 
I know all of us here, but I stand just as equally frustrated when you're out and you see people out and about in playgrounds and beaches and and whatnot 
and we're held to you know very different standards. 
But when I tell you that we're working 18, 19 20 hours to make sure we're given the best, I know it's not what we all want, but I do respect what you said 
and I really do appreciate uh that feedback. 
My last thing is really more of a statement and um. 
You know when I look at the guidelines for opening in new york and 
it seems like they print a new one every week, because they change the rules so crazy, um. 
You know you look at them. 
If I can say that you know john, when you said it was cryptic, it really is 
I mean you need to you know you can interpret this 50 differently. 
Yes, yes, 
but they have a mandatory column and then recommendations for best practices, which I don't understand, but 
it talks about um ensure that social distancing, six feet uh at least six feet or a physical barrier is maintained between individuals while in school facilities on school grounds, including cafeterias, unless safety or care of activities such as moving equipment or elevating elevators traveling in common areas requires shorter distance of individuals. 
But then number two says: if social distancing is not possible, individuals must wear acceptable face governments yep
, that's exactly how we interpret what we talked about earlier if we have to move kids back into a classroom. 
The way I interpret this- and maybe legal legal counsel, give me you know 
their opinion right is that if we had to move desks closer together, okay to be able to not be able to, you know, uh accommodate the social distancing by putting masks on the kids, we would be able to do that 
and that's exactly how we started out our planning. 
If you remember we had looked at, I think it was the massachusetts model where we were looking to at least go no less than three feet 
and when we did that it was like everyone's high fiving each other everyone's coming back. 
This is great and I don't mean to put mr block on the spot, but we did receive guidance from legal and it looked as though that masks were not going to be appropriate alone, but we read the regulations the same as you. 
It was just as disappointing when we found out that was not to be mr o'keefe. 
The other day, um you'd mention that if we were able to go three feet, we could accommodate every student. 
Every kid come back. 
Every student we had every building make up a class for three feet, and so we were able to say that if parents felt safe for their children to return that we were able to do that our hands are very tied um. 
In terms of that, and you know again, I don't mean to put you on the spot, mr black, but you may want to jump in then 
it was a few weeks ago where you know we thought that just mask face covering was going to be sufficient. 
If you couldn't maintain the social distancing uh, but then the governor's office came out and clarified that and said that no you have to have that physical barrier and um. 
So that then took away our what we thought was our ability to have face masks, but the face coverings are okay in the hallways and the bus. 
Yes, well, yeah, there's! 
No! 
It's not that's! 
Yes, nothing makes sense, but that is uh. 
That's 
that's what we're following 
so aaron um. 
As we all know, I should have had a swivel chair, john I'm just saying. 
Should I have a swivel chair, as we all know, um education is is not going to be pretty this year 
um and we want to give our children as much as we can and we've spent so many years working on this educating the whole child and worrying about social, emotional. 
I'm, the most emotional person shouldn't be talking about this, 
but um. 
So a couple of things, our most vulnerable, social and emotional. 
As we see little children adapt much better. 
You see a two-year-old in target with a mask on it's, not a problem. 
Um, my teenagers find the mask, uncomfortable and, and so um hours. 
Six through 12, in my opinion, are our most mentally vulnerable 
and I just feel like um, because things are so different. 
Are they going to be able to just go down to the guidance counselor just go down to you know, or things like that like like, where they want to just go. 
Take five minutes with the guidance counselor or even the school psychologist. 
Is that still going to be fully in place opened to everyone? 
Is there also? 
I know that um. 
I know that over the the distance learning period last year that our sagem north um sel chairs they 
they did a tremendous job. 
Having a google meet also are are things for mental health in place 
and then my other question is what does recess look like in um in covid land in elementary um? 
I think yeah, 
because I think I lightly brushed over that. 
So I'm glad that you asked me about that because you know so last year was the big thing that we were taking away: 
five minutes from lunch and recess and uh see, there's always bigger fish to fry people um. 
So, with that they're gonna be allowed to go outside 
they're gonna be allowed to run it all off. 
Are they allowed to play on the play gyms? 
Are they allowed to play ball with one another, or is it you're going to stay there and just run in place 
and you're going to stay there and run in place 
and 
yeah? 
I mean, I think. 
Realistically they are children, we're going to do our best to set up so that it's a safe environment, but there's not going to be boredoms out there if they are playing ball. 
I can't tell you that we will they're going to be, as I said earlier, rotating between the fields that we have the playground equipment that we have and then the basketball courts, so we would obviously have equipment outside for that. 
We do have sanitizing stations that we will be utilizing for the students but again um. 
You know, as I said I think in the beginning. 
We do not want our students to come back feeling like we're in jail, and the first thing that we had on our slides was the social, emotional well-being of our students 
and I'm very proud of the program that we have built here, and we are just looking for unique ways whether it be virtual, more push in from our sel chairs. 
You know all project kindness, all of those things we'll still have them this year. 
They just may look a little bit different in terms of the mental health staff, ms graham and the office of student services. 
Now under the direction of mram better with ms graham, we will be deploying guidance counselor. 
All of those different all of those services are still in place, but we see ourselves doing more proactive lessons as students come in and more push in into our classrooms, so that students feel comfortable. 
We know the issues that we're seeing out there again. 
Our sel chairs have sent out a survey to our students at the secondary level, and I agree with you at the elementary level we're going to be doing more proactive, resiliency skill type of activities with them. 
Our health teachers for the past year have been building a health workbook for the elementary schools that are rooted in all the resiliency skills that we have been studying using the university of uh pennsylvania. 
So we're really excited about what we can deploy for our students, and you know it goes back to yes
, we are so worried about curriculum and we are we are. 
We are going to work to ensure that all big ideas as much as we possibly can until this is all over is taught, but our first charge is just making sure that those kids feel happy and safe and healthy coming in and our staff as well. 
Our staff has not only been teaching from home uh prior to the summer, but they also had their own issues that they may have been you know undergoing. 
So that is our number one goal here. 
Thank you no problem, mr keith. 
Mr science. 
Uh. 
One of the important questions that was asked this morning was about safety and about how kids are wearing their masks on the bus they're getting off the bus 
and now they're walking into the building with their masks on maybe a hood on
, maybe a hat on and 
they're not going to be as easily identifiable as they have in the past. 
One of the suggestions was to wear lanyards with maybe id cards. 
I'm just wondering what else. 
If there's any other suggestions, if there's, how are we gonna, I mean? 
Obviously health and safety is number one concern that that is a that is a major concern of not being able to recognize kids and especially, ninth graders, who are now new to the building. 
So we don't know any of them to begin with, and and sixth graders are now going in there right. 
So there's going to be a lot of unfamiliar faces and even more unfamiliar with me. 
Well, so not too unfamiliar only because we do have our transition meetings for all fifth graders going into the sixth grade and then all eighth graders going into the ninth grade, and we did those virtually over the past few months prior to the ending of school. 
So all teams at the high school level, in conjunction with their middle school and then middle school to elementary school. 
We met on every single student, not just some, but all so they were able to physically see a picture of the student talk about the student all of those things, so so we're hoping right that there are similar, uh some familiar faces coming in but, like we had talked about this morning, the use of the student badges. 
We have never truly enforced the way that we need to now, but we would have to ensure that the students are maintaining that and showing that because they will be wearing masks as they come in. 
However, we are also spacing things out, so the kids aren't coming into school in mass quantities, so should, in fact you know, prior to all the badges coming out. 
You need to slip down just so. 
We can kind of recognize you put back up and go back in. 
I think we would feel safe and comfortable in terms of that, but we'll be working with our staff working with security and seeing what other measures that we can um, you know put into place. 
John. 
I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that. 
Just to pick it back up. 
If we're going to have the kids wear their id cards just a matter of how fast can we get the idea? 
Yeah? 
That's the 
that's the only thing, 
and that's why I say in the beginning. 
We may just have to do the old-fashioned, put it down for a second, so I can see, but you know our staff is pretty astute and granted the ninth graders uh. 
We may not recognize them all, but we all you know. 
We know our students here so um, that's obviously another concern would be now we have them wearing their i
d cards 
and of course, we all know that 10 to 15 of the kids are either going to lose them or forget them. 
Do we have a mechanism to reprint them in the building daily so that everybody has one um? 
Thank you, okay, so just for the community, we we are able to duplicate that. 
Yes, thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss any other questions we moved on. 
I just wanted to make sure that we at least took a poll of where we stand. 
As on remote learning, did we want to take a poll and leave it at one full year of a commitment? 
Did we want to talk about a half year? 
Did we want to talk about a quarter? 
I think it's important that we do it now, so that we don't wait until last. 
Second 
and we're changing 
yes 
[
Music]. I understand what rob was saying before about this. 
I'm just curious why it wouldn't be sufficient if we just changed the language to where we could evaluate if it were possible and had people understand that it could potentially be that long, but we could, of course, if situations allow we can, we can, we can shorten it and truncate the time period. 
Can I just ask a question to mr block: 
I mean 
I just just because I can foresee 
I'm sorry jim just because I can foresee something are 
we are 
we even legally allowed to tell somebody they're not allowed to come back? 
That's 
you know, that's a 
that's an unanswered question. 
You know 
and it's unprecedented um from a legal standpoint, and 
you know I understand fully the operational issues from a legal standpoint. 
You're going to want to see more flexibility, because the concern is that family will say that being denied. 
My right education, it responds back, is no you're being educated, being educated remotely, but that's not the same type of education as an in-person education. 
So from a legal standpoint, I would recommend that there be some flexibility built in. 
I was actually going to state that if you were going to do that, um still keep the year uh, but have a reevaluation the ability to be able to re-evaluate, as ms heinz said, that that's going to occur on a student-by-student basis. 
Anyway, if there's a concern from a parent, but parents are maybe being a little bit um, not almost like misled, but don't not aware of the fact that there may be a re-evaluation, but that's something you may want to clarify, and you could do it in an interval period. 
You could do it. 
You know after the first quarter, 
yeah, 
that's as a re-evaluation, for example. 
Yeah 
I mean 
yeah. 
One of my concerns would be is that they realize what remote learning entails and they're like I. 
This is not what I signed up for we're not going live, we're not doing this or not right, and then we get an influx of kids and now class sizes grow and we don't have the space to have everybody in. 
So I just I want to make sure that we have that flexibility
, I'm sorry jim 
[
Music]. Well, my position is 
I like what bill just said. 
My position was to get the true figures. 
The way it went out was probably the right way to go, so people aren't saying. 
Well, I can experiment for a while and we never really get a true picture, but at the same time I think if you put it if the language was softened up to say, the possibility of a full year is real uh. 
However, you know there's going to be uh, independent cases that have changed, etc, etc. 
So we all know that we all know that this could all change, but to get the true figure up front. 
I think they have to be aware that this could be a full year of remote learning. 
Uh. 
Yes, that's just my opinion. 
Yeah 
and I apologize. 
I don't have the survey in front of me. 
I don't, 
I think I said could be, but I don't recall, but we could certainly again put that out once we see the numbers and 
if, in fact we feel like, maybe families felt a little bit um, it was too strong 
and they're, not really quite sure we can. 
We could send a call out. 
We could send out an email as quick as you know now, if we wanted to the reason why I asked that question is: is that we based that plan on every single student returning? 
Yes, we did so the issue is not space. 
The issue is scheduling. 
Yes, that's correct right! 
Yes, so I view it as well and and because of the six feet right, you know obviously space because of that, but the six feet parameters is what allowed us to go to this plane to accommodate every kid. 
They should be right. 
So if we don't have all if, if not all kids return, then we will have more space, obviously and then can bring back more kids. 
So so the thing is like I said: the issue is not the space matter. 
You know the plan was devised based upon every single student returning and that's why I suggested you know, maybe doing it 
once you know one or four times a year um. 
You know. 
For that reason, I understand that it could be a nightmare scheduling. 
Well if the restrictions aren't lifted, I guess we have 13 kids. 
In a seventh grade, honest math class and we're looking at a schedule, you're going to look at the section 
say all right put them in mrs smith's class or put them in yes correct. 
Yes, so you know the issue is that you have this. 
You have the space, it's just more of a scheduling thing, and I would imagine that if more and more kids come back from remote learning, we could reassign teachers to classrooms. 
Yes, well, and- 
and that's the point 
right so in a year where we're already saying the curriculum's interrupted the day has been corrupted. 
That's the only thing that we wanted to minimize in the beginning and get a true account, because you don't want to be moving teachers around and upheaving schedules, but we can of course always hand select and uh. 
You know put students in as outliers who really do need to come back, but we didn't want to forget. 
I don't know who said it before. 
We just didn't want people thinking, I'm going to try it out for a week 
and if I don't like it 
I'll, go because we're just. 
That would be really good. 
A quarter um you know, and that will give us enough time to do the planning and do the scheduling if we have, if we had to. 
I just think that the one year signing something this is one year, scaring heck out of people based upon the phone calls that I received today. 
So I guess we'll have to then decide. 
Are we doing flexibility? 
The flexible option, obviously is the best for everybody, but do we want to say one year or do we want to say by quarter, 
and I guess we'll vote on that. 
So if you want to do a full year, write it with flexibility, you can vote on that full year. 
Flexibility, yes, so just put we'll put our hands up 
and I'll 
just we'll count them all full year with flexibility or flexibility with re-evaluating every quarter. 
Okay, 
so yes, but maybe we could put what would be the best way to well 
yeah. 
I think that what I suggested would be if you want to stay with the full year, but that you re-evaluate on a quarterly basis 
yeah, 
because I just caution us to if we all of a sudden say flexibility, then people, you know 
I 
just we have to have a true account. 
School starts in two and a half weeks, and I I don't mean to be crafts about that, but we we really do, 
and so I think, mr black, the way that you had said it um. 
I think you know it's a year, but we would be reevaluating it throughout the year for everybody. 
I 
I 
I like what he said. 
Does that mean? 
No? 
I don't think that you're going to make that full commitment. 
I don't think you can quite frankly 
yeah. 
So I think that the concern was being raised was that parents, under the impression that you know no matter what I do 
it's a year now
, if I commit it's a full year, that's not going to be the case. 
We're going to look at it on a quarterly basis. 
Again, it's change. 
There could be 
a week wake up tomorrow with an executive order which states that parents, you know, can make the choice on daily basis. 
You know so um you know, so 
I uh. 
I think that what it's going to be is that the district will look at it. 
We're going to look at our operational needs, we're going to look at the parental needs and make you know an informed decision, but that the benchmark be on a quarterly basis. 
Would it help if we provided some sample language 
and then you're able to let us know if that language looks appropriate, because we can send that out. 
You know as quick as uh. 
You know sunday evening or monday morning for folks perfect. 
Thank you any other questions. 
All right. 
We are back in the agenda letter f approval of minutes. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr mike caruso second and by meredith opie. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried number two. 
We are in the visitors section public comment that pertains to the agenda. 
I'm just going to need those cards or, if you're going to call them, is fine too 
yeah 
sure I'm going to call up the names we do have several. 
I just wanted to make a reminder announcement that the visitor section, the public comment is in fact a public comment. 
It's not a question and answer type of period, so I know that some of the cards that we are getting do have questions on them. 
I think possibly it's better. 
You know to if, if questions are asked, we can have them written down 
and we can take your email and we can have a response sent to you by email. 
If that's good or mr picarella, if you want, we can also include them in our forum on monday. 
That's fine 
right 
yeah. 
I just think it would possibly be best to email or you know, speak with you separately regarding 
okay, um. 
So the first gentleman, mr caputo, I'm sorry capuano, 
oh okay, my name is mike capuano. 
My daughter is brooke capuano. 
She goes to sagem, you have an excellent school here 
and you have an excellent school because you have the best teachers in the country. 
I believe, when you take the teachers away, you have a bunch of buildings here: okay, uh, to think that you're going to lock a child in a room with a bunch of books 
and if you could fast forward 10 years that, like a doctor or a lawyer, is going to walk out of that room. 
It's just not going to happen. 
Okay, now the main reason that we're all here is the six foot: six foot: six foot: six foot- 
that's all we're here for why? 
Don't we tell everybody that that's a farce? 
If you build the partitions around the desk, the six foot is not necessary and I called osha 
and I called the governor's hotline. 
Okay, if you build the glass petition, the teachers are worried. 
Also. 
I understand that if you build a glass petition against the front, the teachers could walk in the back and they would be behind the petition. 
711 protects their cashiers and they all come in when it's time for their shift and 
they're back there. 
Furthermore, the children could walk in behind their petitions and take their masks off. 
The teachers could be up there with the blackboards and take their masks off and everything would be back to normal. 
This is all we're all here, because we're refusing to build the petitions. 
You could take that desk. 
There's schools that have taken that desk and they divide it like this boom and boom 
and there's four children on that desk 
and it's totally legal you can be. 
When you put a mask on then or any kind of petition, they said you could be nose to nose. 
I was just in a restaurant that was so packed the booth, the person right behind me I turned around. 
I was looking right in his face. 
I called the hotline from there because- and they said as long as there's a petition, there was a petition in between the booths and the petition was only this tall. 
I was looking in the guy's eyes and they said there's no regulations for the height of the petition. 
Okay, so all we need is the petition, and all this is gone. 
Okay, second of all, second solution: why don't you just have the people that want to come into school and the teachers that want to come into school come in and the ones that want to stay home and the children that want to stay home stay home instead of forcing the ones that are horrified to come in to come in and the ones that are desperate to come back in. 
My daughter wants her teachers and she wants her school 
and she wants her friends. 
Okay, what? 
If all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in? 
Everybody who needed to came in to to help 
and they kept america going to mind odds that the schools are the only ones that let us down now, as this gentleman said these kids in five years, if we could fast forward to the ones that are starting now, they won't be able to read and write. 
I don't know how many people go to europe, but our kids already can't read and write. 
We are kids in college. 
That can't add this is the death knell of america. 
This is not some small thing here that you're deciding and there's no reason. 
These are guidelines. 
Schools all around you hop hog everything else open five days. 
This is your decision to do in the generation right here. 
Remember that this is the beginning of the end of america, okay, god. 
We hope that they rescind this, but if they don't rescind this, this few years here will be known as the covid dummies. 
They won't make it into college. 
They won't do anything and there's no reason 
and anyway. 
Lastly, I want to say, if you open the schools, why bother the first kid or the first teacher that gets covered you're going to close all of sagem? 
So this is all the foss all this money, the reopening programs and everything. 
It's all a big fuss, 
okay, it's it because this is being treated like the bubonic plague. 
Mr capuano
, I'm sorry there's a three minute time limit. 
Okay, thank you. 
Studies all around the world have opened up. 
There's not one case. 
The ymca tracked their own tracing 40, 000. 
Kids, not one mr kevin. 
Thank you very much for coming. 
We appreciate it. 
Thank you so much for listening 
and I wanna say. 
Lastly, the governor said this is for us to talk not three minutes. 
I listened to this young lady for three hours. 
That was not the guidelines. 
You're worried about guidelines, guidelines, the governor said the people should be able to come in and talk not listen to. 
You guys tell me what to do with my child. 
Okay. 
Thank you very much. 
Okay, uh miss uh muchitash. 
Please can I just start sure 
yeah 
um hi, my name is 
lauren mukhitash 
um I've been in station for 13 years 
now I have elementary age children, I'm going to jump the agenda. 
Oh I'm sorry
, um, I'm going to jump the agenda a little bit uh and go to item 12. 
um there's been a proposal to create a divor diversity task force in sacrum, central school district. 
I'm here to voice my support for the creation of that task. 
Force sachem student body is comprised of 25 percent racial minority students. 
Our e and l students represent a staggering 98 different languages spoken within this district of 13 000 students. 
Our students represent a multitude of cultures, religions and abilities representation matters. 
Our multifaceted student body deserves to see themselves reflected in their teachers and administrators in the books they have access to and read 
and then the curriculum they are taught. 
So I would just plead with the board. 
Please don't render this to a toothless subcommittee with no power. 
There are lots of things that I love about sagem, and I think that this is a step in the direction to improve upon what we already have a strong foundation for. 
Thank you. 
I'm sorry. 
Next is uh. 
Mr warren 
hi uh, my name is jason moore, I'm a parent in the community, uh sageman graduate. 
I would like to make a plea to the board: please value and respect the school community by maintaining a high standard of transparency and communication at all times, but particularly in times of crisis. 
The communication from the central office and the board has been unacceptable. 
It is essential for every member of the school community students, teachers and families to be constantly updated at all times about every aspect of the reopening process. 
The meeting this meeting was not advertised to the school community at large. 
There were five parents outside barely and they left please as soon as possible, communicate the following. 
Please communicate the following to community immediately. 
How will we ensure that our remote students are receiving an equitable education? 
I can't accept that they will receive a subpar education. 
You've put in your email that I received. 
While I was standing up front says it will not be the same. 
I need it to be equitable. 
I need my child to get an equitable education. 
They need to be live instruction and ongoing assessment. 
We need to figure it out. 
We need to put programmers in place. 
We need to figure it out. 
It has to be figured out. 
We cannot make an exception where part of our school community is receiving a subpar education. 
It's not acceptable, not acceptable to me should not be acceptable to you 
and it's not acceptable to your teaching staff. 
I know that for a fact. 
Secondly, a building space plan must be made available to the teacher to the parents of this community with individual room measurements and the capacity to maintain authentic social distancing at all times, and I need to know about the source of ventilation. 
I need to know what the school buildings look like. 
If you're telling me 17 kids in a classroom, I need to know that there's room for 42 square feet for every 17 one of those students I need. 
I need that in writing. 
Before I even think about sending my child back, I need clear opportunities for all parents to participate in this process. 
I shouldn't stumble upon this. 
I should be knowing about this weeks in advance. 
I need specific criteria for testing and tracing in all school buildings. 
I need a contingency plan for what happens when the rate of transmission rises above three percent. 
What do I do with my child? 
How do I make accommodations? 
I need to know these things before we put our kids on those buses. 
It's unacceptable that you're asking me to put a remote survey in place by friday, and your first parent meeting is on monday. 
That's unacceptable. 
The parents need to know. 
What's going on, the school community needs to know. 
What's going on, the teachers need to know, everybody needs to know it's unacceptable, please. 
I need you to do a better job of communicating with the school community. 
Most important details need to be related to about our children's education in the future. 
Please address these issues immediately. 
The students, the teachers, the families in this community deserve at least this much. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much. 
Miss favaro campbell 
hi, I'm michelle for campbell. 
I wanted to just address the board about the diversity task force. 
As all of you know, I started that email and requested that it be put on the agenda and that you all consider creating one. 
It's been 10 years that I, my daughter, started 
well she's going to be a senior now so 10 years ago 
I actually started talking to a lot of district office, which is very changed now. 
Maybe mr scavo might have been on the board of ed back then I don't remember, but most of you are not we're not then um. 
It's been 10 years, since my family started talking about the having more diversity and representation within sachem 
and I'm really excited to see it finally make an agenda. 
I want to also make it really clear that it's about race, religion and abilities. 
I want children in wheelchairs to see themselves in books in their classrooms. 
I want children with autism to know that they are just as represented as every other kid in every princess book in every superhero story, and I want to help show our curriculum expand to teach children that kids with down syndrome can be teachers, because there are stories of preschool teachers who have down syndrome and kids, who are deaf and blind can grow up to graduate harvard law, school and become disability advocates and travel the entire world, and I right now we just don't show that we don't have the staff. 
We don't have diversity in our staff. 
We don't have diversity even in the books that they see when they walk into a classroom. 
So I just wanted to thank you all for putting it on the agenda tonight and for entertaining the idea and to understand that it's actually bigger than one issue
, it's about every kid at sagem walking into their classroom, walking through hallways and right now, where I know reopening and dealing with covid, but this has been 10 years actually a little bit more in the making and sacrum is going to go on long before my daughter, who's going to be a senior and my son is going to be a freshman in high school they're going to be gone, and I don't want to leave that task force 
like I want this to be 10 years from now. 
Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program has a very different experience than what they had, and so that's really important to me that you all knew that. 
So. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss sanders, hello, everyone, 
oh hello, everyone, maria sanders, um! 
I am a parent um. 
I would like to just make a statement um in respect to the reopening committee. 
I 
I was a member of the reopening committee 
and I just would like to express my disappointment in the fact that the committee had no part in the actual planning or process of of the plan that was presented to the community. 
My understanding was that we would be part of that process, but instead we had two meetings where we were basically given the list of directives as administration and and the board of vet had planned. 
So basically, we got a sneak peek and the ability to ask a few questions, though I certainly respect the time and effort and energy that administrators put in, and I will not take anything away from that. 
You fail to utilize the very volunteers that you asked for because there was a tremendous amount of talent within that grouping 
and we certainly could have helped you in putting together this plan for myself having students in second in middle school and high school. 
I recognize that this plan is not going to be adequate for them and again, 
though, I understand right now, we we're hoping that the testing standards are loosened. 
The value of a full-time education will not be, and these children cannot get a full-time education when they're in school. 
Fifty percent of the time they're only seeing a teacher, fifty percent of the time 
and they're they're sitting home in front of a computer for the other 50 that amounts to 10 days a month when normally they would be in school for five days a week. 
So I just asked that in the future, when you come to the community- 
and you ask us to step up and come in and help you really utilize us, because our voice really has not been heard. 
That's it! 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Uh miss williamson, nicole williamson, okay, uh, miss cologne, hi everyone, I'm josephine scalon. 
I have a soon to be second and third grader, and I just have a question because I'm still undecided about the virtual verse going to action school. 
If you go to school and you start in the school, do you have the option of then going virtual? 
Would that be an option? 
So I'm sorry 
go ahead. 
I'm sorry! 
So we're in this portion of the agenda. 
We're not allowed to do back and forth and answer questions. 
If you'd like we can have your question written down and leave your contact and we will answer any question that you have. 
I can promise thanks. 
Thank you very much. 
Is it allison? 
Is it on the court? 
Is her email on the card? 
There's a phone number on the card. 
Do you want to put an email perfect? 
Thank you so much um, the next one was also um several questions. 
Would you prefer to contact this person as well? 
I mean I mean he's been waiting, so 
if he wants to ask him and then it's miss rep rapuno, okay, thank you, yeah! 
That's all! 
For the first section uh we are on page two at the bottom number. 
Three business items consent agenda a through c, and I have a motion. 
Please motion by bill cogan second, by laura slattery. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried sorry bottom of page three personnel consent agenda. 
A through l. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
This is kate bleedin. 
So this is an unusual way to welcome many of our new staff, as we um are having our first kind of live forum most of the time we have folks here to welcome them in person, and some of you are virtual. 
We would like to welcome all of our new staff that we vetted through really intense interview processes this summer with our administrative staffs in the building and staff members, uh faculty uh involved in the whole process and um. 
That includes clerical custodial teachers, teachers, assistants and I think we have also gotten to um the administrative section. 
Did I catch that correctly? 
Okay, so we're through the l- 
and I just want to welcome those folks that are in consent, agendas, uh. 
So far, thanks number five is support staff consent agenda a through j. 
Can I please have a motion motion by meredith second, by jimmy and caruso. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried christie. 
Did you want me to stop again 
yeah cause? 
I think you have michael there. 
Yep uh joining us today is michael emanuel um. 
He is over here to my left, the far right, if you wanted to just stand and give yourself a wave, uh michael, is joining us today, as the network and systems administrator 
he's been a integral part of our technology, um staff who have been working with jack renda in it. 
We're really excited about all the great things that we're going to continue to get the growth for our technology as we push through and put our smart schools um investment through and and enhance the use of our technology for our students and our staff. 
So welcome michael, we are on the top of page 12 number six personnel administrators consent agenda. 
A through g motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
okay, we'd like to take a moment to recognize two other folks in the uh audience today. 
Uh joining us is dennis mcelherne um. 
If you want to give a wave- not quite sorry, I'm trying to stay on top of it here. 
They're. 
This close, this close sorry guys a little more suspense 
we're going to be towards the top of page 14 letter h, probationary appointment of the administrative personnel. 
There you go andy. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr coggins? 
Second by mr wadawa discussion, discussion um. 
I will be voting uh no on this in the next two personnel items. 
Uh. 
My reasons are the same as they've been for the past several board meetings concerning central administrative positions. 
That is, I believe, the new superintendent should be part of the process in any administrative appointments. 
Uh. 
What I must make perfectly clear is that these candidates, as well as those from the prior meetings, are qualified and capable of the positions to which they are being offered, and I would fully support them if the new superintendent was part of the process. 
So this is a process, negative vote and nothing to do with the personnel uh. 
The new superintendent is close. 
I mean we're almost there 
and we certainly have qualified staff who could perform these functions for a short time as interims, so that for that reason, and that reason alone, I'm voting no on the next three administrative positions. 
I must stress it has nothing to do with the individuals. 
I fully support them and would support them in the future. 
Mr kieran, just because you asked for a discussion and for the public and anybody at home by losing our superintendent, our assistant superintendent and our special ed director
, we would have left three positions open where we would have needed interims and just for argument's sake, mr o'keefe. 
What is the going rate for an interim at that level per day? 
For which position are we speaking? 
Let's say it's: the superintendent um rates vary, but a going rate for superintendent is probably 12 to 1300 a day, and then what about the assistant super? 
An assistant superintendent, depending upon which position it could be 800 to 1000 a day and an executive director of special ed would also probably be in a similar range, a minimum of 800 a day. 
So what and- 
and I don't necessarily disagree with your argument- 
but what what we did was we took a vote to have these positions filled. 
We had three people doing five people's jobs and it between losing that on a normal year is almost impossible, but losing it during covet is is impossible um and we put things into motion to have these positions filled by qualified people to save that money, and this is money that I mean we we already just talked about taking custodians off- that we don't even know if buildings are going to get cleaned in time. 
Now we want to take more money out by filling these positions with indoors. 
I think that that's a slippery slope if we go down that path. 
Well, I appreciate what you're saying uh my my uh. 
My position is that a superintendent of schools, uh, is the single most important person in the district and totally accountable to us and the district for making decisions and to have a superintendent of schools, not part of the process. 
Even though a new superintendent come in and doesn't know, the personnel is certainly going to ask the qualified people who who they are and do cement and be part of the interview process. 
I 
I think that's even more important than the saving of a few dollars here and there, but that's 
I mean I
, I see I'm alone in that position, but I stand by it. 
I 
I understand where you're coming from I just if I don't appoint somebody until september 1
, that's a long period of time at thirteen hundred dollars a day, eight hundred dollars a day, and while it seems like a few dollars here and there over a three month period that we haven't had people that it starts to add up, and when we need money down the line, I would be afraid that we put it on in a room 
is when we had qualified people who could take these positions immediately? 
I will remind you of your fiscal prudence soon, [Laughter] alex just because we're having a discussion, 
so mr 
kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight
, I I have personally known all of them. 
So it's without hesitation that I think that they are the best fit for sachem. 
I don't care who our superintendent is. 
I've trusted mr o'keefe, as our interim superintendent, to make the recommendations, and I 100 percent agree that any superintendent coming in will not find any better candidates than the ones we're putting forth tonight. 
Opposed motion is carried dennis uh, we're going to start with andrew larson, so andrew just want to welcome you to the high school north principalship um, 
andy has been a teacher in our schools. 
He's been in personnel, he's been in an elementary hiawatha principleship, a sagamore principalship, an ap and two of our high schools, uh and now he's joining the ranks of the leader um ship in north 
and we'd like to welcome you and wish you all the best we are on letter. 
I probationary appointment of the executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion. 
Please motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
[Applause] dennis mclehern. 
He's 
he's welcome back to sacham. 
He has been in our school district working as a school psychologist, an assistant to uh coordinator for special education. 
He left for a short stint to go over to north bab as a director over there 
and we're really lucky to have him back and part of our team as the executive assist executive director for special education. 
Welcome back [Applause] and letter 
j is an approval of an saa agreement for the executive executive director for special education. 
Can I please have a motion motion by ms slattery? 
Second, if I miss volpe, all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 14. contracts consent agenda. 
A through t. Can I please have a motion ocean by mr coggins second by mrs wadwa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 20.. 
It's an action, itemist number, a mandated new york state board, training for matthew, bauman and robert scavo, all in favor, get kind of a motion motion by mrs volpe second by mr man. 
Caruso all in favor opposed motion is carried number b. 
It's an appointment of board committee members. 
Can I please have a motion motion by miss lottery second by mr scavo. 
Any questions all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
Letter c. Is a board of education retreat? 
Can I please have a motion motion by ms wado, a second by mr bauman, all in favor. 
Any questions sure I just want to make a quick comment: um, especially since we're being fiscally prudent, a retreat is not like gurneys or something it's where we all sit in a room and talk. 
I just want to make sure that that's clear, because we are not going on vacation, though, because my first year I was prepared for gurney's 
and then we sat in the same set library. 
Thank you. 
We are on the top of page 22.. 
I'm sorry 
are we 
I apologize. 
Can I uh all in favor opposed motion is carried the top of page 22 donations consent agenda a through c. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr coggin second by miss ottawa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried number 10 at the bottom of page 22 committee on special education consent agenda, a through b motion by miss volpe. 
Second by mr mancaruso, all in favor opposed motion is carried number 11 monthly reports. 
So we there was a question from the community about when the committees would start meeting and how I think that, maybe, if people that were leading these committees, we want to maybe set some dates. 
We could do something virtually 
I'd like to see the budget committee start talking about if there was a possible mid-year cut and look into any and all options that there was. 
I don't know if there was anything else that you may want to look into, but that's just one that I thought of. 
I don't know about the legislative committee. 
If mr kiernan has anything for the legislative committee, okay, all right number, 12, we are back on public comment. 
This portion of the public comment will be on any and all items that anybody wants to speak at. 
That's not on the agenda, and everyone will have three minutes to discuss and, like we said before, this is not a q a and a back and forth, but we do want everyone to be able to be heard. 
That wants to be heard. 
Okay, the first one is miss young 
[Music]. Oh, I press this. 
Yes, thank you for waiting for so long. 
Thank you. 
You guys have been outside the season board of education, members and community. 
It's come to my attention that vp sarah waterworld wore a bill. 
Okay, okay, we're a blm t-shirt at a board of education meeting. 
This is unacceptable. 
I can respect a person's right to free speech and to have their opinion. 
However, blm is a political movement and it does not belong at our border bed meetings or in our schools and indoctrinations. 
The definition of a racist is paramount in the name of black lives matter. 
The name indicates that black lives matter over the other races. 
This is unacceptable and this racism does not belong, including the blm is putting itself over our law enforcement, which many of our community are employed and of all races this once again making blm a black organization. 
Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has they have not registered as a charitable organization. 
We do not know whether the blm t-shirt, that was worn was for the black lives foundation or movement in either case. 
It has no right if any one of the board members wore my hat supporting trump, I'm sure the same thing would happen. 
The apology that was put on facebook was cynical and scolding. 
Call us as all races and insisting blm is not is not a political issue. 
Last I checked. 
Everyone in america had the same rights regardless of race, sex, color and sexual orientation. 
As specific cases of discrimination are happening in our community, then we must address those issues. 
What offended me is the use of rap music before sporting events, glorifying women's segregation, drug use and the cursing and the songs with the word and in it this is not acceptable. 
If we are going to talk about discrimination, it can it's got to be used both ways. 
So, let's start by banning that bml, not political, tell that to the murder black trump supporter bernal tramell. 
Furthermore, the disgusting political use of blm as an attack on our police and blue lives is not acceptable. 
Our community of all sects and races is made up of law enforcement. 
Blm is declaring war against all blue lives matter. 
Miss young there's a three-minute time limit. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much, miss o'connell, so conor. 
Thank you very much for waiting. 
I know that it's been a while 
okay. 
Well, I am beyond angry at what is going on with our children. 
Okay, we are not doing the right thing by our children in any way, shape or form at this point in time whether we want to send our children to school or keep them home. 
Neither of those options currently are acceptable. 
I sent everybody board members in email. 
I got one reply challenged every one of your board members to go and spend 10 minutes in one of the one of the classrooms. 
On the first floor in the second floor of one of the high schools did any of you do that 
yeah? 
I didn't think so. 
Yet you all think it's fine, obviously that we have no ventilation in the classrooms for crying out loud. 
We have to have special ventilation in the malls and other businesses, but where our most vulnerable are we don't? 
None of you would work in these classrooms in the current conditions, none of you. 
So why would you think it's okay for our children to be in there even before this, but 
definitely now now the air in those classrooms just stands there, because there's no movement, there's, no, nothing and covert will stand in the air until it falls down on somebody so you're putting our children in an environment that is guaranteeing that if somebody has gold, but it's going to get on all the rest of them horrendous
, it's despicable and now I'm hearing that remote learning is going to be a joke. 
That's not okay! 
Either! 
Okay, I don't want my child in one of those rooms. 
I want my child safe, but my child is taking five ap classes next year, which means he needs a robust distance learning program. 
But my understanding is we're not doing that. 
Am I incorrect? 
No okay. 
So what we're doing to our children is despicable and you should all be ashamed of yourself just a second. 
Mr block, just a second, mr kyle 
I'll get your answer question right now. 
I had a conversation with him. 
You know, I know that you were asking the question about the uh being restricted in terms of the assembly 
yeah, 
but it's pursuant to the governor's executive order, one of the number of executive orders 202.45
, I looked. 
I believe I looked at that one, and that was talking about social media. 
This is okay, I'm just gonna back up just a little bit just so we can keep our space now. 
It talks about non-essential gatherings. 
Yes, and this is not essential. 
That's correct as long as while we're virtual, because you still have the option of being virtual, the board decided to assemble. 
Oh so so you guys decided. 
This was not essential. 
So because you decided the governor, that's not that they don't decide. 
No! 
So who decides well, there's based upon the governor's orders. 
The governor said that this is an honest. 
The governor said that we can conduct this meeting virtually or yes, you can yes 
but yeah. 
So as long as you can conduct it, virtually meeting is considered to be non-essential because you have the ability to be able to connect the virtual reality. 
Okay, thanks thank you for that. 
It's, mr black, 
so 202.45 it was extended by 202.53 and it's in effect, until august 20th, okay, 
next fury good evening, I'm a proud sacrum educator and a parent of three daughters who attend sageman schools. 
I'm here tonight to voice my concerns regarding the secondary reentry plan. 
I have a daughter in eighth grade 
and I also have a senior. 
I have grave concerns regarding the lack of an equitable education for our secondary students. 
These children will suffer the ramifications of this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
In some instances, this decision may change the course of their adult lives. 
I don't want that to happen to my children 
and I don't want it to happen to anyone else's. 
I implore you to reconsider this plan and attempt to find a way to make the secondary re-entry plan more equitable, so that our chm students can receive 100 of the curriculum that they are entitled to just like our elementary students. 
Thank you. 
That's all 23 board discussions. 
The first one we put on today uh was an adoption of the 20 2021 calendar. 
There was a talk of a change. 
Mr o'keefe 
yeah. 
It's just you know something I want to bring to the board's attention because obviously administration has been meeting with district administrators as well as our teachers looking at the opening of school and just trying to be sure that we can be as prepared as possible for whatever that is. 
Other districts have taken a look at this and also um chosen that option each year a district is allowed up to four superintendents conference days. 
Our current calendar has three uh. 
The first two uh are in september the september second, and third days are superintendents conference days um and the third one would be. 
On election day november. 
Third, we've been discussing the possibility of having the board consider the ninth, which is wednesday
, I'm sorry, eighth, which would be the the first day of school for students to be a third superintendent's conference day in september uh. 
That would give staff teachers administrators everything all the time that they need to be sure if there are those last minute, tweaks changes to classroom setups changes to schedules assignments. 
Whatever the case is, you know, I had a lengthy conversation with mr barbara last night. 
You know his guidance. 
Counselors are ready to dive in to do whatever work needs to be done to make our secondary experience as good as possible, but we need the data first. 
So once we have that data we can dive in on this, we don't have much time and time is not on our side um. 
So for your consideration, um we'd like to talk about adding the eighth as a superintendent's conference day. 
Would we have to remove another day off the calendar for that we would just convert that date to a super. 
I wouldn't alter the calendar right now other than that. 
Obviously, since the year hasn't even begun, uh it still keeps us within legal limits. 
It still leaves us the flexibility if we were to have a severe winter um. 
You know, maybe with the new reality of our ability to switch between distance learning. 
Maybe that can even help us. 
You know in bad storms and things like that, where we might be able to turn something like that on and not lose instructional time, but I think giving the staff that extra time, especially since we're down to the wire uh you know, could be helpful now on the counter side. 
Obviously, families are already starting to make plans they're ready to send kids back on the 8th 
they've already made decisions they've arranged child care. 
Whatever the case is so it isn't just as simple as you deciding let's re-adopt a calendar, and maybe it's not even something you do tonight. 
Maybe it's something you consider you think about, and maybe it's on the next agenda for the 26th, but I wanted to bring it to your attention to give you some time to think about it and talk about it. 
Um you know. 
Is it a possibility where we could consider that day, uh for additional staff planning? 
Does anybody have a question about the calendar? 
I'm just thinking we're gonna make this decision. 
We have to make it tonight, so parents do have enough time to make arrangements. 
Mr bauman, can you um what kind of professional development day would it look like? 
What would it look like? 
Well, it would be a useful day for the teachers too 
yeah. 
It's not a none. 
I mean miss heinz, can speak better to the professional development days. 
None of them are going to be like the normal professional development days. 
I'm sorry
, I didn't mean professional development superintendent's day. 
Would it be a day that the teachers would be able to kind of get their stuff together? 
Yes, we 
so I mean, as we've been saying, our teachers have been working hard all summer ongoing professional development. 
This is really more honored space for them, so they can continue to clean up. 
Get things ready, make sure the google classrooms all their lessons, are in place. 
So not our traditional. 
You know ad camp style superintendents conference days, but we recognize that it's a tremendous amount of work to get started. 
Does anybody have any other questions? 
Does anybody want to vote on it tonight or did you was the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready? 
It came through a conversation. 
You know, administration and staff have asked for it. 
So I agree with sarah the earlier the better I would agree as well. 
We can vote on it right now. 
All right motion to change the calendar to the eighth being a staff development day. 
Second, by miss volpe, all in favor opposed the calendar is done, get that information out to families as quickly as possible. 
The next item up for discussion is future board letter writing. 
This is something that I personally put on. 
I 
I don't think that we should be putting letters out to the community if, with all of our names on it, if we don't agree with what it says, um and I could be in the minority on that- 
but I'm I would be fine with writing a letter, putting spaces underneath and letting those who agree. 
Do it now 
most times it's a nine, nothing 
and there's no issues 
but um. 
You know I personally didn't agree with the letter that got put out and if my name is going to be on it especially admonishing another board member. 
I have to agree with it um and that's just the way I personally feel about it. 
I understand that we're a body 
and I get that, 
but at the end of the day, it's our name 
and we have to put our head on our pillows 
and if we don't agree with something I want everyone to have the freedom to not only say that but be able to just to live with the decisions that are made and to be able to stand up to the community and say here. 
I did this or I did not do this and have a straight face when you say it, 
I 
I just 
I didn't agree and 
it's my fault for you know ever putting my name on that piece of paper. 
So I just I want to put it from here on out. 
If anyone has an issue, please feel free, but if, whatever letter it is, we write the letter, our names are on the bottom and we can sign the letter if we agree with it. 
If we don't, we take the space away and then you don't have to sign it. 
If you don't want to, but at least you can, you can make your own decision and you don't have to feel like you're beholden, 
because maybe it's only five people who agree with it and five out of the nine agree and now, all of a sudden, it's a board decision and your name goes on it, no matter what jim 
so uh, how do you determine whose name is going on 
suppose four people want the letter out is: is that sufficient to send the letter with four names? 
That's uh! 
That's why it's up for discussion, so I did it. 
So it's got to be a majority. 
Take to even have the letter go out, so five members have to support it and then, let's suppose it's a 5-4, the letter does go out board of education and the five members who agree with it sign it. 
That's 
I'm going to see that if anybody had an issue with that, I I just wanted to address it tonight so that we haven't had a chance to get all together in a room. 
So so let me express you on the opposite end of the spectrum. 
If four people want to put a letter out and it's a four or five board, the four people be able to put a letter out, because the way that, when you sign up for the board of education, you sign up as a group, 
okay 
and you vote as a group- 
okay 
and hey, listen, there are things that happened in the past. 
Why? 
I was on the no side of a vote where I got dragged to the mud, but I signed up for that 
yeah. 
You know, so my my impression is that five is a majority and and it's what moves resolutions and it's what moves you know uh. 
You know uh different different uh incent, you know initiatives and so on and so forth. 
So so I think the easy way to do that is that when you're getting attacked by a community member okay, because of what the letter says, your response is look the board. 
The board majority voted on it. 
I don't necessarily agree with it. 
You know, if you have concerns, please contact the rest of the board. 
You know right 
and that's how we leave it. 
Just just my just my personal opinion this I happen to disagree 
only because when we pass, let's just say the new principle for sage of north in the in the minutes, it will reflect that jim voted. 
No, it's not going to vote that. 
Yes, we voted yes, but if you go look in the in the back to it, jim can say I 
I 
I said no 
and he could say anybody to the community 
and here's why I voted no and he could put his head on his polo 
and he's fine like it will not reflect that. 
I said no and, and just like, I think it's wrong- that you get dragged through the mud on stuff that you voted no for, and you can't even back it up, because there is no record of you ever saying. 
No, unless you look through certain things on votes 
yeah, 
but if it's a letter, there's no record of anybody saying no, 
but if the letter's coming from the board of education is it coming from the board of education? 
Is it coming from five board members? 
I mean I, so I guess my point is: I don't think we should be writing any letter. 
That's admonishing another member 
I mean most most letters are in agreement to the state saying we need our funding to the state saying we don't agree with certain things that they're doing, but we should certainly not be or so um and- 
and maybe, mr black, you can answer this. 
When we get elected to the board of education, my voice means nothing more than anybody sitting out there. 
My voice only means one as part of us nine. 
We 
I have no say I can't decide anything. 
I have no more decision making than my neighbor next door. 
My my only input or influence comes as as a board of nine, so the letters that we had done previously, like supporting our seniors graduating in person or the denouncement of betty devos as the education or denouncing racism that was issued as a board, not as me as an individual. 
So I think legally, mr black, if you could just give us some guidance here that, when the board of education of sagem school district issues a letter, I think it has to come from the board. 
If laura slattery, who who lives in wisconsin, wants to send a letter to governor cuomo, then I signed my name: laura slattery, not laura slattery, ch, board of education, trustee and- 
and that's 
I feel that me on this board, I'm not a republican democrat independent anything. 
I am representing a community of 55 000 registered voters, my personal opinions or anything I feel 
personally does not matter when I'm sitting here with the nine nine of us. 
My only thing that I can do as a board trustee is in as a majority of this board. 
Unless, legally you see something, that's how I feel I was elected by the voters. 
I was elected by my sachim community. 
I 
I feel like I have to represent my sagem community as one of nine, not as laura slattery individual and, of course I don't think, that's being suggested um, 
but um we're a governing body and every governing body around the country 
operates that way. 
You operate as a body, you're elected to be part of this body. 
You make decisions as a as a body. 
There may be differences of opinion, that's part of our democracy. 
That's what makes our country great um you'll, be able to express those opinions. 
At the end of the day, you have to make a collective decision, and then you have to abide by the decision that that body makes one possible solution. 
Is that um? 
If you are going to issue a letter and there's concerns that um dissenting members vote is not going to be known like it is? 
When we take a public vote, you can take a public vote to send the letter, and then you can adopt that letter as a majority vote. 
Those who dissent are on as a matter of record 
they're on 
they're on record
, if that's the case, so so you're saying that no one member is allowed to remove their name from a letter. 
I would say that that's not typical practice that you would see, but is it legal for a member to remove a name um? 
Well, if the, when your letter is going out um, I don't think it typically sets forth all the names. 
I don't know. 
I don't really like to say it. 
Has it printed all your names on the left side, it says, there's a list of all the names and on the bottom
, it's the president's name. 
So, on the left side of the letter it has all of our names listed 
yeah. 
But that's your that's! 
Your letterhead 
right 
yeah lists all your names. 
It doesn't indicate whether or not you voted for that letter to go out or not. 
It's you're represented on that letterhead. 
It's an official board of education stationery! 
That's why your name is on there. 
It's not signaling that you voted for that or not, but the recognition is, though, that when you do take a vote or when the board puts out material that that's so 
so that's a fine
, that's a compromised decision. 
I think that any and all letters should be discussed in public and voted in our public. 
That is a concern that you have that's one way of addressing it. 
Yeah I I was just going. 
I was just going to say that that sounds like an excellent idea and that really just goes back to like 
you said about my vote. 
You know is on record and your eight votes are on record for these fine individuals here. 
So that would be the same thing. 
We discuss a letter. 
You know we take a vote on it. 
Yes, if it's a majority vote, the letter will go, but the dissenters are also in the minutes. 
I like it 
and I'm 100 in agreement with that. 
This way, it's a public discussion. 
Anybody can look back, but then we still are issuing a letter based on a majority of the board, but as long as there's a record of who votes yes and who votes? 
No, I'm correct. 
I am 100 fine with that. 
Just one statement and me and laura have gone round and round about this before, but I want to. 
I want to make this point. 
Look we're all elected members to this board as any elected official is. 
If I want to write a letter- 
and I want to sign my letter bill, cogan board trustee sachem, I'm 100 within my rights- to do that. 
It's a matter of opinion as to whether or not I should do that 
if I want to get together with four other board members and each one of us want to sign it as board trustees. 
Once again, we are within our rights to do that. 
All right. 
It may be perceived as a bad idea by this board, but there's nothing illegal about it. 
Okay, inside it's not a vote. 
I don't think we're going to take here. 
I just I just wanted to make sure that we discussed it and there was at least a public so that all future letter writing is done in public and just also just to add to it. 
It's been customary that at the bottom of the letter, the signature block states, the president's name on behalf of yeah 
just signed the letter sincerely the sachin board of education and not place the president's name on the bottom of the letter. 
Okay, uh, the last item up for discussion is the diversity task force. 
So, as you guys know, I gave you guys all an outline about what just got a little bit closer. 
Sorry, I gave you all the um an outline, probably in the end of july, and I don't know if you all got a chance to look it over 
yeah. 
I shared it with the board again um the other day. 
Sarah. 
So I would just like to like make a motion to put it on to vote tonight on establishing this task force. 
Yeah 
I mean my my only issue is, and I don't have a problem with this diversity task force, but the way community committees are usually done is that we could vote to establish one give direction to administration to come back as to what the charge is going to be talk about the charge and then approve it um. 
I 
I 
I would say that that's that's, probably the route we should go and in the years that have been on the board
, we establish construction capital projects, committees and you know some are established for one specific job 
and then they 
they they disappear, and that was for um one of the uh. 
You know construction projects that we did um after that 
we didn't do any for a while. 
So we didn't need that organization, but I would say that we we either vote on it tonight. 
Yes, we want to pursue something like this. 
We understand what the end game is, what we're trying to achieve and then um normally what happened is administration would put together a packet of a pamphlet, that's made available to the community. 
They could download it in a pdf format. 
People would sign up for it submit in the same way they would for a budget advisory committee. 
You know or so 
or you know any other thing, so I would just say that we we follow that format. 
You know and- 
and you know, we're not adopting exactly what 
the world no 
but we're establishing a diversity, task force and and charging administration to come back to us with what the charge is going to be. 
I would have no problem with that. 
Any questions everyone all in favor of 
I'm sorry, yep uh. 
I read the whole thing like lots of times. 
I think it's great, you know we need it here in saturn, all in favor, all right any opposed. 
Mr picariello, this still uh one visitor that we had called wasn't here at the time. 
Um miss williamson. 
Thank you, miss williamson, I'm sorry! 
I know that it's late, I apologize. 
I was doing yard work 
and I was listening. 
Thank you and I had to come 
so I apologize um. 
This is my first time doing anything like this, so I really don't have anything written out or able to look up anything outside. 
So I'll tell you about myself. 
I have four children, three at hiawatha, two of them with severe nut allergies and one of them with viral induced asthma. 
I didn't, I don't really know. 
Well, let me just go with this. 
My kids are fine, they will be homeschooled and they will be homeschooled. 
Well. 
What about all the other children that aren't as lucky as my kids? 
How come? 
Nobody is talking about them? 
How come what nobody's talking about the children getting hit at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't eating at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't learning or being sexually abused at home? 
Nobody cares about those kids. 
I hear a lot of things, how we're emptying the rooms and there's going to be nothing in there? 
No one's allowed to touch each other, no one's allowed near each other. 
We're not we're teaching our kids to be scared. 
I was scared for a long time. 
I've been hurt. 
I've been scared of allergies and a nut killing. 
My child fear cannot run us. 
We need to stand up for who we are and what we believe in 
and I believe all our children deserve a fair chance at life 
and we are not giving it to them. 
I think I think that's it. 
Thank you very much. 
I know that you waited a while. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Letter c is board of ed discussion. 
Future agenda items future discussion. 
Items excuse me: does anyone have anything future to talk about covered three tonight? 
We okay, the next meeting. 
I don't know if that's the right date. 
That's today. 
No, the 26th okay is august. 
26Th
, we're hoping to still be here at 7, 30 p.m. 
Can I have a motion to move into executive session 
yeah 
now we need a reason. 
Mr block um, we're discussing uh uh we're discussing uh property, yes, property. 
I'm sorry! 
I just lost me. 
First real estate transaction, yes real estate transaction. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins say goodbye, mr bauman. 
All in favor meeting is good. 
Thank you very much. 
Everyone good night be careful. 
Going home, okay.
Thank you very much. 
Um is [Music]
, read the congratulations um, so, okay, 
okay, visitors! 
Well, everyone please rise for the pledge and then remain standing for a moment of silence with liberty and justice for all. 
Thank you [Music] good evening. 
Everyone, as you can see, the board of education is attempting to return to some form of public meeting, which is also compliant within the limits set forth by the governor's executive orders and the guidelines of the cdc and department of health. 
We must limit the number of people permitted to be physically present as a part of our compliance with those obligations. 
Perhaps the most important item for our meeting tonight is a public discussion about the reopening plan for september, as it pertains to the plan. 
We hope to have answers to most of your questions as part of the presentation, but may also need time for the administration to research, an issue on occasion. 
You can always email the superintendent with the question as well. 
I am also aware that some attendees may wish to speak about matters related to conversations that occurred on social media and the role of the board of education. 
In that regard, if you wish to speak, please be sure to fill out a card and give it to the district clerk. 
There will be two opportunities for public to speak at this meeting. 
The first is limited to comments relating to agenda items only. 
We will then move through the agenda after we complete the agenda items. 
A second opportunity for public comment about non-agenda items will be provided. 
I ask that all present please be reminded to be respectful of one another. 
The administration and the board. 
Also the opportunity for public comment is just that public comment. 
The board of education will not engage in debate or back and forth with the public during the period of public comment in an attempt to provide all who wish to speak an opportunity to do so. 
Our policy limits comments to three minutes. 
There may be people who wish to speak, who have been left outside due to space limitations. 
Please ask security station at the doors for a card and they will bring it in to the clerk again. 
While we respect the community and we always want to provide people with the opportunity to be heard if things devolve into personal insult or invective as the president, I will entertain a motion to adjourn the meeting. 
I thank you all in advance for your cooperation to start tonight's meeting. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe are going to make a presentation about our reentry plan. 
Sure miss florio. 
Could you fire up the cameras for us all right 
just give us a moment. 
While we wait for that and while we're doing that, I'd also like to apologize to those from watching from home, because, unfortunately, obviously from that distance you're not really going to be able to see our screen. 
So for that we're very sorry um. 
You know, unfortunately, the limitations of how many people are in the room you know have we been able to move it to an auditorium. 
We certainly would have done that um, but we're limited to a total of 50 people or 50 of a room's capacity. 
Whichever number is lower uh, so, unfortunately we're at that 50 capacity in this room this evening. 
This document, we're going to show tonight again 
is another evolving document. 
Back on the 31st, we placed the district's plan on the website, as required by state law. 
That plan had to talk about three different models for return, which it did since the plan was posted on the website. 
You may have seen additional commentary from our governor where he has since changed some of the parameters, such as offering additional opportunities for choice for family uh and or for staff. 
So we need to take those things into consideration um. 
So again, this document and the presentation you're going to see this evening is the most accurate as of now, but it by far is not completed uh at the conclusion of tonight's meeting in this presentation, you're going to get a copy of this presentation emailed to you through the school messenger system, it'll also be up on social media and it'll, be up on our website, 
you're, also going to receive an invitation to participate in a survey regarding choice. 
It's a follow-up to the survey that we sent out last week, where we asked potential preferences, this one's going to need to be more definitive where we actually need to know which families are looking to have their children receive instruction at home versus those that are willing to send children to school uh. 
So without further ado, I'm going to ask miss heinz to start us off. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe. 
So this morning we actually concluded and had our last committee meeting, which culminated in the plan that we're going to be sharing with you tonight 
and, as mr o'keefe said, all of the community members will be receiving at eight o'clock a phone call to this manner 
and um also the plan and the survey for remote learning um. 
I just want to thank all of the folks that were on that committee with us. 
We are made up of several community members unit leaders, staff of all sorts, and it really has been a pleasure to work with everybody. 
Excuse me one second, while I got this on 
okay
, so after a tremendous amount of feedback that we received from our survey from our community and given the lengthy documents that we have given out and the models over the past few months, I can happily say that we are able to offer a full return for our elementary students k-5, as well as a full return for our students with disabilities, our special class, which would be our 15-1 classes, our 12-1 classes and our 8-1 students, and at the secondary level due to size and the fact that, because we will need to reappropriate space at both levels, elementary and secondary, we will have to move forward with a hybrid model for grades six to twelve, and that will be an a b schedule based on alpha and household. 
The reason why we were able to uh offer a full return for our elementary school is because mr o'keefe and myself and our instructional directors and our director for facilities and the building principal began walk-throughs. 
Last week. 
We walked through each and every room in our buildings to space and measure at six feet. 
On the average we are able to fit about 17 students in a class. 
Now again, please know that we have scheduled a full return with our total population, so with any remote instruction that would diminish the amount of students coming into our schools, so we would actually have even more room because of the re appropriation of space we needed about one extra section or one extra grade level k5 at each building generally, so we are going to be utilizing space in our libraries in our arts and our music rooms and other common areas, which we'll talk about a little bit later on remote learning 
is something that, as you know, last week, it was confirmed that we will, as districts need to be offering this to our students as well. 
This will be a parent choice and a consent uh tonight at eight o'clock. 
Again, when you receive that plan, there will be a survey in there 
and we ask that only parents who are looking to remotely instruct their child fill out the survey, and it is due. 
It is a fast turnaround by friday. 
We need to be able to staff and schedule the remaining students that we have coming into our schools, remote learning again, that is by a parent's choice with consent and 
no at this time it is a decision for the entirety of the 2021 school year. 
I say this now because, based on the number of possible staff who may also look for accommodations, that might mean staff members staying home in conjunction with our students, we need to match up to see if we have enough staff members who are going to be able to offer remote instruction or should we have to look towards live streaming. 
If we do not have enough certificated staff that matches up with the number of students, and so therefore we would not have possibly a physical space for students to come back to. 
If that were the case, should, of course, all restrictions be lifted through the governor's office, then we would have to, and hopefully would have a little bit of time in between. 
We would just have to restructure and reschedule to ensure that all students are able to return remote instruction will entail. 
It is not like being in person school 
and it is not distance. 
Learning. 
Distance learning is only going to be offered. 
If, again, we are ordered by the governor's office to remain at home. 
All students and all staff remain at home, and that would be live instruction for two and a half hours on google me that would be k12. 
Remote learning is different. 
This is um, more asynchronous learning with possible, live or streaming teaching happening throughout the day. 
This would also be a schedule that would look a tad different based again on the number of students and how we would need to support everybody, but we just did want to be. 
You know fully upfront and present about that. 
We also know that devices for us 
we are not 
a one-to-one school district. 
We have definitely made some strides and we are in the middle of major infrastructure work that is going on. 
We just did order about a thousand new chromebooks in order to be able to disperse for families that do not have any technology in their home at all, but it would be difficult for us to provide a device for every student in their home 
should they be on remote learning. 
So that would be something that the family would also have to consider. 
Students will be expected to complete all assignments daily and any students, obviously with disabilities on remote learning, would be provided all of their accommodations as per iep. 
As for their iep okay um, it's important
, I'm sorry
, it's important to just uh also talk about the secondary hybrid model for six to twelve. 
On your a day, let's just say um, you know, for the sake of just explaining it to everybody uh, it would be a combination on on a day. 
You would be in your child would run their traditional regular schedule. 
They would leave with homework and any work that would be on their google classroom for the next day that they are home, while the teacher is then teaching the other second half of the class on b. 
Obviously, our teachers are committed folks and they would be checking in answering any questions uh within that 24-hour period, but we would expect that at the secondary level, again, kids will be making sure that all of their assignments are completed and 
they are, and they are present. 
Attendance is important as we move forward in this school year. 
Okay, now that we shared with you a model of how we're looking to return our students, I think it's very important that all families and community members now our staff knows about the health and safety measures that we are putting in place, and we continue to look to put more in place as as time goes on, masks will be required for all staff and students, both in school and on the bus. 
Remember that the bus is an extension of school, any students are having any difficulty wearing a mask for medical reasons or because of a disability will need to submit documentation. 
As always, they would affirm this with their building principle or through the office of student services. 
Mass breaks will be provided because remember in our classrooms. 
Our desks are six feet apart and in the regulations. 
Children do not have to wear a mask during instruction. 
We would encourage, of course, that masks be worn at all times, but that does give us the opportunity to give multiple mass breaks whenever a child does need it, while they're being instructed masks are to be worn, though, however, in the hallways cafeterias, if they're not eating recess any other common area that we would just want to be safe, um, we also every day um. 
Oh I'm, sorry excuse me. 
Uh bus travel will also include, as I said, before, social distancing practices optimally. 
We will be looking for six feet spacing and encouraging family members to sit together. 
Every day, parents and staff will be expected to fill out an online health screening survey and in this presentation, when you do receive it, you will see a hyperlink in there that you can see a sample of what it looks like ahead of time. 
We are also. 
We also took time to ensure that at arrival and dismissal, varied entrances in all of our buildings will be sanctioned off to separate grade levels. 
If they come off of the bus, we are also looking to uh take off the grade levels at increments of time off the bus. 
So everybody is not coming out at the same time so again, just looking to work ways to have plenty of flow while classmans may not look typical, especially at the younger levels. 
You may not see some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see. 
Please know that our classrooms will be warm and inviting like they always are, because their teachers will be there. 
Their principals will be there and we will still be able to decorate it. 
We will just not be able to decorate it with things that kids will be touching, because it would need to be sanitized every day. 
All classrooms will be devoid, as I said before, of any of those items that may collect germs. 
We are in the process right now, of setting up opportunities for our teachers to continue to clean out their their own personal items, and we are also moving out any unwanted furniture that we don't need in the room so that we can maximize the space hallways and other common spaces are being marked appropriately to ensure social, distancing, so markings on the floor items around on the walls and that's also shared later on in our presentation. 
So you will be able to see it at home as well. 
When you open up the link hand, sanitizer stations are located throughout each building, all along the hallways. 
We will also be having them at the elementary level or any other area for gym cafeteria time when, at the secondary level, they're able to go out so as children go in and out, they can use a hand sanitizer as they come into school. 
All of those uh. 
You know, welcoming areas would have a hand sanitizer station as well and at the elementary level. 
We would expect that the students, because we do have sinks in every room they would be washing their hands before and after snack and before and after lunch. 
Okay, so continued on. 
As I said earlier, we have reappropriated spaces at the elementary level and we are in the process of doing the same walkthroughs. 
Now in the secondary buildings. 
We know it's going to be very difficult, especially for the cafeterias to be utilized the way that they typically are, because children cannot sit in those tables together. 
So moving in some desks, uh looking at classroom use all of those different types of things, but really at the elementary level. 
We will be using again if we're going on full return for all students. 
Right now in elementary school, we would be looking to utilize our music space, our art space, and so therefore, those special areas become pushing for our students. 
We have worked with those departments and we'll continue to work to make sure that they have everything that they need for their lessons and equipment. 
Cleaning of all buildings will occur daily in the evenings in each classroom. 
We will also provide hand, sanitizer, wipes, gloves and any sort of spray bottles and wipe offs for for our staff and or students who feel encouraged to clean in between applicable filters have also been changed in our classroom events uh. 
We will also look to open up our windows and our doors where we can. 
Obviously you know the reverse was safety making sure that your doors were always locked. 
Your windows were always closed. 
Now, we're being encouraged by the department of health to please use fresh air when possible. 
So we will look to do that prior to it becoming too chilly up. 
Isolation areas have been identified in our buildings, and so, if a child uh is it has any sort of of symptoms 
or they come to school 
and they have not filled out the health screening. 
Those students would be placed there so that we can offer a temperature check and make sure that everything looks okay before we send them down to their classroom hygiene protocol visuals will exist in all buildings if they're not there. 
Already and again I share those with you at the end of our presentation so that you can see them. 
We will also be having routine hygiene drills much in the same of how we have regular school building drills at this time. 
Unfortunately, no visitors will be permitted in our schools. 
We just cannot provide enough secure measures for our staff and our students, and so again we will be limiting all visitors. 
Both traditional fire and hygiene. 
Drills will be conducted elementary snack and lunch will be in the classroom to minimize flow and secondary lunch. 
It may be in the cafeteria and alternately in the classrooms. 
We will also rotate any outdoor areas so for recess any of those other matters classes will be rotated on the game field, the basketball court, let's say, for example, and in our playgrounds students, are encouraged to bring their own water bottles. 
We do have bottle filling stations in all of our buildings. 
Our water fountains, unfortunately, will have to be closed at this time. 
Okay, so just some additional elementary return details that we wanted to share with you. 
You know it's always tough to start with health and safety, because again we don't want it to sound, like our students are returning to jail, but we do want to make sure that our students and our staff feel safe for the return. 
But please know that, on top of everything that we are doing, the social emotional well-being of our students is of the utmost importance to us, as well as of our staff, and we have surveyed students and we are looking to survey further the rest of our staff to just find out what are some of those underlying issues or concerns that people have. 
So we can ensure that we have our mental health staff there for supports. 
Unfortunately, we we will have to stress that students may not share materials. 
At this time, students will be assigned their own independent, math, workbooks and guided reading baggies will be provided weekly so that we have time to interchange them out clean them up and leave them for the weekend, so that uh there's a two to three day lag before the children pick up a new baggie and in those items we will integrate. 
As always in our literacy and our math, our science and social studies, topics whenever possible, this will be in addition to the strong direct instruction that our classroom teachers provide. 
Already all all students will be benchmarked for their ela and their math to identify their present learning levels. 
Curriculum will be retard as needed. 
We definitely know that this will need to occur for math, and we have provided some slides in the past that show you that we're fortunate we created our own math curriculum here a couple of years back 
and we know uh the the one to two units that each grade level will probably need to go back to 
so that, if I'm coming into second grade, I'm certainly not going to be able to start on my second grade. 
Math curriculum 
I'll need to be re-taught, some of the materials from when I was in first grade and for literacy. 
Once the teacher knows the collective levels of what they have in their room, they will be able to accommodate those literacy. 
Lessons around that art and music will be a push in again to minimize the flow, and we are currently working with our art, music departments. 
This is one that was a really tough hit. 
Music has to be 12 feet. 
Apart for any coral or any sort of wind instruments, we are working our hardest with that department. 
We are very fortunate here. 
We have a very strong music program and we do not want to see that diminish, and so we are looking for ways to think out of the box in order to be able to offer course opportunities that might be in smaller sections and different ways to offer lessons as well, but we have provided and are keeping all lesson areas in the elementary schools, so that students can still maintain lessons as needed. 
Physical education will be a mix of separating two classes. 
Typically, that are adjoined, so one class will be in the gym. 
One class will be outside and inclement weather they will rotate between the gym and in the classroom. 
Um, mr butel and miss mcentee have reworked their curriculum to ensure that all team sports will be done in the spring, so all of those units will be taught in the spring and in the beginning it will be more personal. 
Fitness. 
Traditional grading will also return for our students. 
While we know that there may be some interruption in terms of what model our students may have to face, where we hear rumors that we may have to go to distance learning sometime later in the fall. 
We fully believe that by using google classroom no matter what we will be able to make that seamless transition to distance learning should we need- 
and we are well prepared, as opposed to when the crisis first happened, and most school districts were really just grasping at straws, but we also know that the accountability is something that is very important to our students very important to our community and especially to our students who are at the high school level. 
As I said before, google classroom will be utilized for communication at both the building principle and classroom teacher level. 
We really want to make sure that parents are on one medium so that they can see any communication, email messages, lessons etc, and at this time we are going to enforce, to ensure for the safety of our staff and other students that any sort of instruction that is done on google classroom or virtually that our students adhere to our district code of conduct. 
When students this year sign on families sign on to look at schedules, they will be asked and prompted to sign off on certain measures around this 
okay. 
I just wanted to share with you some of our pictures that john and I took as we went around in our walkthroughs. 
These are some samples of our our elementary classrooms. 
Again, they're, not decorated, yet, of course, but you can see that we have removed a lot of the traditional. 
You know, wonderful items that we would see in a classroom, but again we really wanted to maximize space and ensure that the teacher had space in the front of where their smart boards are and then also making sure that kids had room and were not. 
You know pushed up too too much, so we still are adjusting that once every single classroom is created at the building level, we will be returning mr o'keefe 
and I, with our team, to just ensure that everybody has space both the teacher in the front of the room and then students around. 
So again, we are fortunate here. 
We do believe that we have enough staff to move forward and should the numbers for remote learning ensure even more flexibility. 
We may be able to open up more sections in our elementary schools and at our secondary levels, bringing back more secondary students uh. 
This is at one more of the elementary school and to the right there. 
You will see a classroom um at the secondary level. 
Um. 
This particular sample is where we marked it the a and b desks, so that students will be sitting 
and then it will make it a little bit easier for cleaning at night for our custodial staff. 
Okay. 
This is this is also a little bit of a tough share here, 
because I know that we've been getting a lot of questions about child care and upk. 
First, child care: we are still going to be providing am npm child care by boce by scope, educational services. 
They continue to offer right now child care throughout the pandemic for our essential workers, and they are happy to move forward to offer this services for all of our students. 
At this point, though, we are on hold for our upk program, and that is not because we don't have the space 
or we don't want to, but we simply have not received the allocations yet from the state, and that is how we are able to run our our upk program. 
While we do have many students who do a tuition based into the program, it is simply not enough to substantiate the program. 
Should we not get the allocations, so we are advising parents at this time. 
I know I've. 
I've answered many phone calls many emails 
if you are need, if you need care, if you would like your child to go to an alternate preschool now is the time to seek that out just to be safe. 
However, if we were to find out about the allocations tomorrow, we would also be able to implement that uh. 
You know moving forward, so we have not changed anything we're not changing any spaces at this time, um we're just kind of on a standstill but to be safe. 
We just encourage you to look just in case. 
Excuse me, ms hines, 
yes 
yeah. 
Actually, since we last spoke earlier today, I spoke to mr duffy uh, 
he's the executive director of scope and runs 
our upk program just trying to see if he's heard anything further about the program 
uh and he has not heard much more than we have. 
As a matter of fact, there was a meeting earlier in the day with the suffolk county, superintendents uh, as well as mr wix who's, the regional superintendent for eastern suffolk boces, to see what boces knew about upk funding and 
again their contacts in albany have been very, very quiet on it. 
The only information they've received is, you know, floating a balloon from albany that they're considering opening upk up, but they may only fund it at 80 percent of what the grant would be. 
So that would mean if the district wanted to move forward. 
That would be an expense that was not budgeted for and we'd have to make a determination. 
You know to take those monies from elsewhere to support the program, so it sounds like they're getting closer to a final decision um, but I'd have to keep the border prize, so it might be a model in which we'd have to support 20 of the program to make it move forward. 
So I'll keep you posted on that. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe, um, okay 
and then on to now our boces cte program. 
So those are our students because we do have two. 
We have cte programs that we house ourselves. 
They will still remain on the a b schedule, but the but the bose cte programs, where students get on the bus and go to boces. 
Boces did alert us last week that they will be providing that in uh house they do have the room so that will be live every day and for those students we will still have busing from our high schools to and from the program. 
We at this time, though, say that we may need family support in terms of if your child might need a ride to school if they are going to the program in the afternoon or alternately. 
That is, that is not solidified. 
Mr o'keefe and mr savone are looking at that through transportation to see if we might be able to accommodate and pick up individual students at their homes. 
That would only be for those choosing remote learning right. 
Only those choosing remotely. 
Thank you, okay, uh. 
So here I just. 
I share the hyperlinks that you will see on um on the presentation that that we've sent home uh for the sake of time
, I'm not going to go through all of these links, but the top is a sample of our health screening form and 
the bottom of our all the protocol visuals a sample of them that we have smattered around every single building and so for our next steps. 
As we said this morning, we finished our planning committee meeting where we laid out the the final steps here with our district leaders and our volunteers. 
Our board of education, pres presentation is, is now as you can see, and then we also have a live community forum on monday at seven o'clock and we will be uh live streaming it. 
Similarly here, however, I would envision that we would be a little closer that so that you can see us 
a little bit more clear um, but on friday we will be sending out a survey just asking community members for questions that they have. 
We will collate those into subject areas and we will look to our best answer. 
Any questions that you have as well as our building administration will be delivering a common q, a sort of like fact sheet about further details pertaining to to the buildings, and this will include sample schedules for all of our students- orientations how those will go out for our grade six on our grade nine. 
Some of that will be virtual and some of that will still be activities just broken up into smaller increments at the building, as well as arrival and dismissal times and bell schedules for secondary students and then, lastly, as governor cuomo had ordered on friday, we are in the process of updating our district website for protocols for any symptomatic individuals testing. 
We are not responsible per se for testing ourselves, but we are responsible for offering a plan. 
Should a student or a staff member go home, they are required to go, get testing where that could occur, and then, of course, they can't come back into school until testing results have been provided and 
then contact tracing as well. 
Okay. 
So that is the end of our presentation this evening. 
We look forward to speaking and sharing some more and clarifying more for you, as the rest of the night goes on and then on monday, as well at seven o'clock. 
Did I oh my apologies. 
Let me go back. 
I 
I didn't realize that I think I got caught up in what we were saying about upk before um, 
so my apologies. 
These are some additional details about our secondary return and again uh, with the utmost priority being the social and emotional well-being of our students. 
In grades. 
Six to eight we will be benchmarking for eli. 
We do that through a literacy management system that we have and also for math. 
All of our math departments have benchmarking type assessments that they do in the beginning of the year 
and again this will be to identify present learning levels in grades, seven to 12 curriculum adjustments may be made for applicable areas where prior learning needs to be had so, for example, 
in our math and our science classes, there may need to be some learning from the prior year's regents bearing class, and so we would be looking to look at curriculum around that and possibly offer review classes for our students as well again, traditional grading will return. 
Students may not share, so we will be limiting textbook use 
and we'll be taking advantage of all of the online subscriptions that we have physical education again. 
Very much like elementary school will be a mix of the gym outside fields and other large area use instrumental lessons very similar to elementary. 
We are working with that department to ensure that lessons will occur. 
They do need to be 12 feet if they are wind and or choral in nature, and again we will be looking to figure out ways in order to still offer those choral groups, but in a modified version google classroom will continue to be utilized for communication with both the principal and the classroom teacher again for a seamless transition should we ever be ordered into distance learning. 
Lockers will mostly be used for am and pickup only that's not to say that if a student really needed to go back, we would not allow them to, but again just trying to minimize the flow and minimize how much our students are putting into the lockers. 
So we would envision some form of outerwear, that's appropriate for that time and uh modified or or very um. 
You know slight binders and or folders notebooks that they need 
um stagger grades again in times of at the end of the period. 
We would be announcing uh grades so that they can come out into the hallways, so that would mean that we would be um at the end of the period starting it a little bit earlier, so that we can allow each grade level to disperse into the hallway to their next period. 
Okay, sorry about that um. 
So that still is the end of our presentation um. 
We hope that this did clarify some further information for you. 
We are appreciative of the support and the time that the community offered us to be able to digest everything and wait for the orders, so we can bring this to you tonight. 
Thank you. 
Questions from the board questions from the board. 
Is anybody, jim, a john on the upk uh right now? 
The way that's funded is uh. 
Correct me. 
If I'm wrong, like a six hundred thousand dollar grant, primarily we get a six hundred thousand dollar grant. 
We hold a lottery that allots 252 families a spot in the program we have more interest than that annually, but families beyond the 253 are able to participate for the same rate, which is about twenty four hundred dollars per family for the year 
okay. 
So if, if the governor uh would give us 80 percent of that, that would mean that the district would have to come up with a hundred and twenty thousand dollars correct. 
But are you in that hundred twenty thousand dollars? 
Are we counting that that the lottery people are not paying tuition? 
That would still be the lottery people not paying right, so, in other words, the 120 000 could be reduced if the lottery people were willing to pay a tuition fee. 
Yes, that was a model the board chose to go with. 
Yes, okay, thank you just to figure back on what security was saying if they were to um to to uh. 
Take twenty percent of that uh we'd be looking at about 479 thousand. 
Two hundred is what we'll be looking at, which is what accommodate 201 kids. 
You were saying that you were concerned that we, we might not be able to raise the funds to be able to. 
You know, manage the program and have enough 
you know what 
yeah 
I mean. 
You'd have to redo the lottery. 
Then I I wouldn't I don't know. 
If would necessity, would you want to use the same number then cut it off? 
Well, I set off at just 201 and then and then open it up at 237.69 per per family per month. 
We could examine any model that the board wanted to take a look at 
yeah. 
Certainly those other families had already been notified that they were among the families chosen for the free program. 
That's the worst. 
The worst case scenario would be correct, but let's say they take all the funding and, and they don't and one of the concerns to have it 
I mean have we thought about reaching out to some of our state elected officials, flanagan or uh doug smith, to find out if they can get us clarification from the governor's office as to whether or not he's going to fight 
yeah
, we can certainly continue to reach out. 
Quite honestly, during much of this crisis, much of them have been rather silent. 
We haven't been able to get a lot of information. 
The governor isn't sharing much with other people other than when he decides to put it out via press conference, I mean. 
Normally, our local representatives are very helpful in getting information for us. 
Unfortunately, hadn't been able to get information for us, but it's certainly worth trying. 
I mean we're two weeks before the start of school 
and you've got 252 families, not knowing whether or not they have a pre-k 
yeah. 
I mean 
I don't know
, you know how the board feels, but I personally think that you would get 252 families, even if they took all 599 000, because at 237 a month for half day pre-k, it's still a great great opportunity sure- 
and I can't and 
now more than ever and and would be willing to work with us if there was zero funding 
and we had enough participation to still run the program. 
Yes would can we include something like that in the survey 
sits some of the families out there to see what the interests would be. 
We could do a separate survey. 
I wouldn't want to you know not on the same survey. 
Yeah put it out as a separate survey, specifically targeted to those families that are already in the process. 
I have a follow-up to that. 
Where are we putting all these students 
if our classes are maxed out at this time we still have not reappropriated those classes. 
We do have a couple of buildings because of additional special education sections that we needed, that we moved the classes, but we have not taken away those class spaces. 
Yet so, if we were to go with the will of the board to you know, put out a survey and go with a tuition base, we would be you know all set to go: 
hi hi uh. 
I just had a quick question um about the bus and 
what is the busing going to look like 
I mean again, it'll also depend on participation. 
You know we put out a survey to the parents uh a week or so ago. 
I think we had nine thousand respondents in in very brief order. 
Um in that survey about a third of the families uh considered, possibly keeping their children home um of the two-thirds willing to send their children in 65 of those said they would use the bus. 
The other 35 said they would drive their children to school um. 
So just some quick, math 
you're only looking at say, 4 500, kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers. 
I mean they could change when we put out the new survey um, and it could be that you know parents first stop that they don't want to use the bus and 
then during the year. 
Maybe they start. 
You know they need the bus um. 
So we're not reducing the number of bus runs. 
All the runs that have been budgeted for would be running um, but with those numbers you'd end up literally with just about one child per seat. 
You know so 
and then you also take into account remote 
yeah 
you'll get routed for 44 students. 
So in the worst case scenario there could be two pupils in each seat, but based on the information we're receiving, I don't think there'll be that participation. 
Okay, just um some clarification so with the custodial staff cleaning each night, so 
they're going to have more to do than they did prior. 
Have we increased the custodial staff since their job description will be different to do a more deeper cleaning every day daily versus 
yeah. 
Unfortunately, that was one of the items that was pulled back on the budget, so obviously we may need to take a look at that 
again we were rating 10 custodians uh and then, when there was issues where we even today, we still don't know what our state funding is um and we still have the potential of a looming. 
20 percent cut um, we decided um. 
If you remember back to january and february, we were talking about this. 
We were adding one extra custodian, each building right um. 
That was one of our enhancements for this year's budget. 
We did draw that back um, so we're going to work with the staff. 
We have work with the substitute staff we have, and you know man it as best as possible to optimize cleaning, 
okay 
and then um with the uh secondary schools, where you have the a b desks next to each other. 
So that means, if I am an a student 
and I sit in only the a 
and then the next day, the b desk comes in. 
That image might change, though I was going to say that that was really more so that we can show a visual to the families
, how we were spacing it out in the beginning, those desks we would see needing to be reappropriated and put into our our lunchrooms different other areas where we're going to need to reappropriate other space, the library different items like that um. 
So I don't. 
I don't necessarily think we were just at north today and in the classrooms that we walked around in with miss trombetta. 
There was only about 15 to 16 desks in in each classroom: 
okay 
yeah. 
That was an initial setup when we were trying to figure out what it would look like or how we could divide them up. 
But in fact, with the style of cafeteria tables, we have it. 
It really prohibits the number of children that can eat in the cafeteria. 
We believe we're going to take all the cafeteria tables out of those secondary cafeterias and store them and put in desks. 
I mean it's not going to be the most attractive. 
Lunchroom it'll be set up more like a testing room where children will be spaced six feet apart right with classroom desks correct, but we do anticipate that we would be able to offer breaks, for you know
, students to be able to go outside and go into any of the recreation areas, items like that elimination 
and 
so then um in the secondary schools. 
If the kids are um changing classrooms um will the desk get wiped down between each change or how does that work in the cafeteria? 
Yes, yes, okay, not in the classrooms that would that would technically be not possible. 
I mean there's 3 000 desks in high school and 1600 or so in in a middle school. 
That just wouldn't be the means in that four or five minutes of passing to wipe down those tables. 
But if we student would want to do their own destiny, the materials will be in the classroom right. 
We are providing that for every classroom. 
Okay and then one last question. 
Sorry, everybody! 
It's okay! 
If a staff or a student happens to test positive, that would then be reported, and then the cdc would guide us on what we had to do like 
or we have our own plan. 
How does that work? 
The department of health, the department of health department of health? 
So they would tell us like so if it's one student in one classroom 
right that may be different than a student in a middle school who passes through a hall or mrs clayton's, become an expert on the matter. 
Okay, so the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require us to make reports for certain things and they require the medical treatment provider. 
The doctor who's performed the diagnosis for a positive result to report information to reporting for contact tracing. 
So therefore, our obligation we go above and beyond to make sure that, even if, for some reason, the medical treatment provider has not contacted the contact tracing, we will just check you know belt and suspenders that we have provided some insight in case there's an instance. 
The other thing is when the lab results come back. 
The lab results are um supposed to be also provided to the contact tracing, at which point the department of health would be uh or enter 
cdc would be contacting tracers and determining who they would contact, including students or staff or family or whoever they came into contact with. 
Can I can I pick you back on that question quick? 
Yes, thank you very much so on the checklist that we do daily. 
Let's just say rob 
and I are in a classroom 
and I find out that he test positive for covid the next day when my parents are filling out the check sheet 
and it says, have you come in contact with anybody? 
That's tested positive? 
Will that prevent my entrance into the building? 
If you're saying you tested positive 
yeah, 
if you're saying you're tested right? 
No, I mean, like I'm, not gonna, tell you that rob testifies we're not allowed to tell you 
I mean I came to learn it. 
It becomes common knowledge of who it was 
yeah, 
and now I have to honestly fill out the sheet 
yeah 
I mean I'm have to now have to say. 
Yes, I did come into contact with some of the department of health guidelines for close contact, and this is where it gets a little squirrelly because you know, are we in close contact? 
Are we in close contact? 
Their criteria for close contact is less than six feet for 15 minutes or more um, so we'll have to look at each of those one at a time, and I can foresee the department of health as soon as schools open, you know, becoming overwhelmed with calls from districts all around the state um just trying to get feedback and answers, so we're building criteria and protocols with our nursing staff with our personnel staff. 
You know, so we can make some of these decisions on our own. 
We have handled situations already, even during summer school programs. 
So it's not that we're unfamiliar with how to do it. 
We've had staff members with with covid um, 
so it's just going to be on a bigger scale. 
Now, that's all, and also just to mention
, mr block is with us this evening from ingram and smith. 
He has been our one of our main contacts that we've been triaging information between the state, the federal, what we have in our schools, what we can do and what we can't do and trying to find the best scenario for our students and our staff 
and we'll continue to do so, and I promise this is my last question. 
So if a parent chooses the remote learning, yes, they have to commit to that for the year. 
They can't change their mind like after the first marking period, they're committing to that 
and then their student um cannot participate in, let's say spring sports, no, 
so um, I think in in the beginning of the guidance, it said that students may not be able to may not be able to um enter into activities or sports. 
We know now that that is not the case and that if a child is remote, they're still a student of ours, we're not really going to have any activities. 
So we don't foresee that being an issue. 
So it's really more for sports, but miss trombetta who sits on uh. 
The community. 
Four section has shared with us um information in terms of how they're looking at that language and how we would not be prohibited most likely from keeping children back from sports in september, and then the child plays a spring sport and then come the spring. 
Sports are up and running 
and you tell the child they can't play, and please just know that when we write that we're looking to make it more of a commitment that could be up to a year. 
That is because we don't want to give the misnomer that if a child says well, I want you know a family to say that they want to be remote in a week 
and then they change their mind. 
They want to do it another week. 
We will look at each case, but it would be very challenging for us to bring back large numbers of students who think who feel they might have made a poor choice, because that would shift all of our classrooms and all of our teaching staff. 
No, I would totally agree with that. 
I just didn't know if it would be like after every marking period reevaluated, but if the parent does commit, I just don't want to hurt the student of course by saying. 
If um extracurricular comes back in spring, your parent made this choice in september, and now you can't participate right and- 
and I think for us
, you know being just uh of mine- 
that things could shift very easily. 
We could look to look at that 
come january 
and it may not need to be a year-long commitment, but we did want to write it down so that parents were aware all right. 
Thank you very much. 
Thank you for sharing this with us 
yeah. 
I have two questions or concerns um. 
When this plan was developed to return to school k through five the ada b day, it wasn't based on surveys that went out as to the number of parents that think they would choose remote or not choose remote. 
It was based on our entire population. 
Yes, so conceivably, if we have a um, a 6 through 12 model of a day b day, hypothetically every parent said, I want my kids to return to school. 
We can. 
We can accommodate all of them in an ajb day. 
You mean physically back into school. 
No, we wouldn't be able to do that. 
How would we physically bring them all back? 
We don't have so at the elementary level, 
just very simple, math right. 
We have to take out about five to six, seven kids out of each classroom in order to be able to accommodate that average size. 
My question a little bit on the six through twelve model- 
uh-huh
, okay, it that was based upon returning every single child to school. 
So if friday, the survey is if we have if we have more children now 
I understand you. 
Thank you. 
So if we have more children who are going to be on remote, we could 
conceivably- 
and I know we discussed this this morning in our committee- 
we could look to bring back more uh students. 
My question is that my concern is the same as laura is having a one-year commitment. 
I received a half a dozen phone calls today, um, probably in the last couple hours 
about I'm concerned about the one-year commitment we know. 
Okay, that you know in remote learning it says remote instruction is not equivalent to in-person hybrid instruction 
right, so it's not the same level 
right so for forcing kids out of school. 
What we're doing is we're creating a bigger educational gap for the following year. 
Well, we're not forcing that would be a parent's choice, but the thing is we allow them to come back after each quarter. 
Okay, if we're able to accommodate them according to the way the plan was designed. 
Why wouldn't we allow them come back after after one quarter, so they can get that? 
I didn't think we said that we wouldn't be allowing we said that it would be really prohibitive for us to be able to reschedule them back into classrooms, but we could look at it based on the numbers that we have. 
We wanted to be honest, mr scavo, and let families know that this could be a year-long commitment, and most districts are looking at that at either january or the year long, because it is very disruptive that would mean having to up just move around the entire schedule for um. 
You know our schools, which we may still have to do, should covert restrictions be lifted, but you wouldn't want to recant, and we know that that happened quite a bit where, in the beginning of all this debacle, we were putting out information and 
then something you know, alternatively, was shared, but I think we just said before with miss slattery, that, of course, if we could look at it by quarter and we felt like it wasn't going to be a tremendous feat for our families that we would do that. 
But I think that that's not probably what a parent is going to make their choice on if I'm choosing to be remote. 
It's because I'm thinking that it's unsafe for my child to be at school. 
So I'm hoping that by these presentation, slides that we have 
people will see that we've made tremendous tremendous um. 
You know strides in making sure that our schools are safe, they're, clean 
and we're doing routine protocols to ensure that, but the commitment is a year. 
That's what this time for right! 
Now! 
Yes, so if something changes at home uh a person, that's furloughed now has to go back to work right
, they want to and their their impression is going to be that they can't return because they signed the paper saying that they have a one-year commitment to be at 
yeah. 
But I mean I think, though um if, if there's something along those lines- 
and we all get those calls all the time, 
if there's a family, that really is in enough need and feels like they made the poor choice or not a poor choice. 
They made the wrong choice for what their their thing is. 
Going on right now, so whether a parent goes back, furloughed or their child is just not doing well in remote learning and they were to contact us just like any other parent phone call that we would have. 
Of course, we would look at every case individually, but I'm talking as a whole. 
We could not say you're going to be a remote 
and then, if you choose to decide in masses that you want to come back, we just would not be able to run the same schedule 
and then we would be restarting everything over again. 
The reason why I bring this up is: I watched the the newsday webinar 
yesterday uh we had dr johnson. 
I finally heard all about him. 
I got a chance to see him in the presentation, along with a psychiatrist along with a the superintendent of north babylon, and that exact question came up right and a lot of the experts were saying. 
I would not go past a semester. 
In fact, a lot of districts are going quarterly, 
you know- 
and I just don't. 
I just don't want to influence a person's decision because they're fearful that, if they sign that paper they're not going to be able to come back because the reality of it is
, is that you know when we look at the education of even a day b day. 
My concern is that, as a teacher, you can't teach the entire curriculum and now we're talking about prior learning 
being re-taught from the previous year, how you and you're never going to be able to teach the the entire curriculum, but the kids that at home that are not getting the same. 
Equivalency of education are going to be further behind the following year and which all we're going to do is create a a snowball effect 
and that's my concern. 
I mean 
you know I personally would like you know the opportunity that, if they, if they come back after, if they're the first quarter, which is a 10-week period or nine-week period
, I think it would be a little more settling for the people in the community um. 
Knowing that all right, this remote's not learning I committed to a year now, I'm stuck well
, I mean, I think I think two things right, because I agree with you. 
I don't think anybody wants to be in the position where we can't welcome back students interchangeably as they need, and we definitely know that, no matter what happens. 
Curriculum is going to be interrupted this year. 
That is a safe bet right, but if we play, if it's the will of the board, if it's the will of the board to change that- 
and you would like to make that language more flexible, we're happy to do that. 
But please know that we've taken, you know quite a concealed amount of time to making sure we would prefer our students not to be on remote, but if a family really chooses and needs to choose that we honor and we respect that absolutely um. 
But yes, I mean nobody wants to do that, but nobody's the size of sagem either, and so we have different restrictions. 
That's why the question was the plan design based on the entire 
um it was. 
It was based on of if all students were going to be a full return, then we would have to go in an a b day if we are finding, though, that we have remote students at a quantity where we can bring back students even an additional day or or by grade level seniors. 
First, ninth graders. 
First, you know. 
However, we look to plan through that. 
Then that's would be our next step. 
So just like what we were saying earlier in our remote instruction um, it's going to be hard to match up what exactly the model will look like until we have the survey results from our teachers and for our families, so we can match it up 
certification-wise. 
My biggest concern is we have kids taking ap exams and getting those kids ready for that and getting those kids ready for the next level college 
yeah. 
You know we. 
We have training as much face time with with staff. 
It's absolutely. 
I agree with you 
and I'm very 
I'm very thankful uh. 
You know working with the scta if we ever have to think about distance learning the fact that we'll be providing two and a half hours every day for our students so running the same schedule, just shortened periods. 
You know working on google classroom interchangeably now and consistently across all of our classrooms. 
You know just right now. 
Currently we have a tremendous amount of teachers that are undergoing pd, virtually to ensure that everything is is up and running and that they feel clarified and supported in that kind of work, but you're preaching to the choir. 
I couldn't agree with you more that this is a really challenging time. 
I have a high schooler myself 
and she's in a smaller district, doing an a b schedule um. 
So I scratch my head a lot right now, 
so I 
I completely respect and understand 
and if the board would like us to look at the year-long date, please just let us know 
and we'd be happy to accommodate. 
No, this this will go the uh, remote learning actually just went out. 
That survey just went out, but we can 
I mean I could send it on on. 
On remind in five minutes, if we wanted to say you know that we've changed the date um, but it sounds like. 
Maybe that needs to be more of a discussion if we're looking to go that route meredith engine 
and then jimmy so on the remote learning. 
If a parent were to choose that model um, I understand that we would want them to commit for the full year, because we are devoting staff just to that remote learning 
right 
we're not using a teacher who may be inside the classroom, sometimes we're going to utilize the staff that, for whatever reason, has to be staying at home to be our remote teachers. 
That's the optimal plan right, so at the elementary level um, it works a little bit easier in that in that fashion. 
If I'm an elementary teacher 
and I'm out
, I can conceivably teach any of those grade levels if I'm a librarian, 
obviously that certification, et cetera et cetera
, it gets a little trickier at the secondary level, because if I'm a chemistry, teacher and 
and I'm out- 
and maybe I don't have as many students out for chemistry- 
you know- then what am I giving to that teacher in terms of work that they would be doing for that day. 
So one could say that she would switch what they're doing and now they're going to teach more science electives and they can support any of those students who are out needing science electives. 
So it's really going to boil down to looking at the hard numbers of students matched up with the teachers that we have. 
Should we not be able to match everybody up which 
I'm hopeful we will be able to, then we would need to start entering into some sort of live streaming or larger groups of google classrooms, where a teacher, instead of having a class of maybe 25 or 26 in a google classroom, we may have to have larger numbers, and so then that's why the year-long decision, or not doing it every quarter becomes very challenging for us. 
If I'm a teacher 
and I'm running a google classroom of 45 kids and 
now some that those classrooms want to go back, what classroom are they going into? 
Where am I fitting them into 
so then you're having to change people's schedule? 
It's a lot of moving parts, it is and then, if um, so we have so children are able to through their parents, choose whether they want to come back to school or not. 
Our teachers are not electing whether they're coming back to school. 
The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning are the teachers that have um reasons why they cannot return, and so, even if tomorrow, you know three weeks after school started, all of our remote learners said well. 
This is for the birds. 
I don't like this. 
I want to go back to school. 
We wouldn't then have the ability to bring them back, because, even though we did the classrooms for them, we wouldn't at that point, have the ability. 
Would we well not at this time, because again
, with six feet, we are, you know down to the amount of numbers that we have, but if, if our numbers look as such, where um the remote learning is um a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms, let's say, for example, instead of them being 17, that might only be 13 or 14. 
So then we could start welcoming them back, but that would be based on almost you know, looking at each student individually and being able to see how we can schedule them back into school, which is probably a very physical impossibility in the next three weeks. 
It's a little hard 
yeah 
um with our secondary schools um as a as a secondary mom. 
It is it it kind of does stink 
and there's no two ways about it: 
our children, no child, is going to get the best education this year. 
It's just not going to happen and something we're going to try our best 
yeah 
we'll. 
Definitely try our best right um. 
If one, let's say somerset had an influx of you know. 
80 percent of their kids wanted to stay home and remote 
learn that would open up a lot more room, but it wouldn't necessarily mean that we would do somerset where their children win every single day and the rest of them. 
No, we would be making decisions that are consistent for all students, but then we might be reappropriating staff to help out in um other ways in other areas, and I don't want to put you on the spot, but it's okay. 
That's why we're here 
we're on the spot? 
Have we looked into sixth grade at all, because in my opinion sixth grade is that lost grade? 
It's a grade where they're a little too young to still stay home by themselves and not only just stay home for the day by themselves, but also teach themselves kind of you know get on this 
get on the schedule get on the computer. 
Do what you got to do? 
Keep yourself moving on that b day. 
Have we visited something that 
once we get all our numbers, because I know we can't really finalize anything until we get all these surveys and numbers, but once we get all those numbers, are we going to be able to maybe look at sixth grade going every day as a possibility? 
Yeah, that's absolutely you know
, that's definitely a conversation that we've been having as as soon as we know what the numbers are. 
Will we be able to welcome back additional grades, and 
I would I would assume that we would be having these conversations with with all of you, our administrative team, obviously as well um and sixth grade is one of those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off at um, because we know that they could be 10 11 years old going into school, and I would not feel comfortable myself at times, leaving my child home for long periods, um, and so yes, we've had those conversations 
and once we know the numbers we'll be able to come back and report if we're able to make any changes good. 
Thank you. 
So much, no problem, just a quick question. 
Some clarification! 
Yes, um piggybacking a little bit on what mr scavo said. 
Are we entering the year making an assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver 100 of content in regards to secondary curriculum? 
If that is the assumption that I think you said that we're almost entering into um, 
I mean who's going to choose what topics and what's being covered. 
Are we letting different teachers different people it just it concerns me that we're entering, I know, there's no perfect answer and there's no scenario that can right that, under these uh circumstances that you've, given you 
but um. I guess that makes more of mr scala's point is that if we're making the assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver content, we should be trying to uh wait till so many surveys come back and see how many kids we can actually get 
yeah and um. 
So no right, I don't have a perfect answer for it, but I can tell you what we're doing to set up for that um. 
I had a chair meeting a couple of weeks ago, so our instructional leaders in each department to talk about that, especially at the secondary level, and so we would be looking at our curriculum at what are the big ideas at the end of the school year. 
What is it that the students are expected to learn so they can um. 
You know move forward and pass those classes and or regence exams, we're also hoping to have a little bit more guidance in terms of the state education department in terms of what they're going to do in relaxing standards and curriculum and testing so much in like how they had canceled the regents. 
We don't hope for that. 
We hope more for choice so that these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents. 
If they want to take it and see what kind of grade they get um, 
I don't
, I don't think we're looking. 
I don't think- 
and I know 
you mean it this way, but we're not assuming we're not going to be able to get through our curriculum, but we want to be real with our families. 
The curriculum could look a little bit different than what it normally does, and I know our teachers again hard workers are already looking at that. 
We've had some conversation, for example around science lab hours, usually that's seat time now 
the state education department has relaxed that, and that could be also a virtual. 
So we've already started those conversations once we come back into. 
Schools in our department means that we've been having anyway
, virtually we'll continue those talks and start looking at that together. 
So this at the secondary level state the new york state, creates the standards for apn regions right so haven't. 
Given us clarification, okay well, ap is through uh is through the college board, and so we actually are, starting, as you know, uh a new ap capstone program at the high school, so 
those teachers that um are gonna begin teaching it for us this year 
they just went through the training for that 
and right now, ap is holding tight to what they're doing, but we also know that at the last minute they made some changes around what they did: testing wise, virtually um. 
So we are 
advocating- 
and I think mr o'keefe spoke about this 
earlier- 
while we have not heard a tremendous amount from our legislators at this time we have been advocating, through our local boces, our associations talking to talking to the college board and just hoping for some teamwork for relief, so that families know that you know we're not looking to make any decisions that are going to make impacts for the students, but we also have to be real and they have to work with us. 
So we're hopeful for that. 
No problem, aaron, the so by the weekend we will have uh the figures on how many people are opting for remote learning. 
Is that, yes, all right and 
the way we have it now is uh they're being committed. 
They can make a commitment for one full year, uh just just for my identification. 
Let's suppose it came back to say 30 percent of our district, one, which could be right, which could be what it could be sure. 
What does that change? 
Anything uh for us with the ab days or or or as meredith said, the sixth grade situation would, let's say, 30 remote for the year. 
Would that change uh? 
You know what we're doing right now. 
Yes, absolutely so like what I just said with business. 
Also gonna take you know. 
Where is the thirty percent 
yeah? 
It could be heavily weighted on the younger children. 
Right, you know, is a k12 pet families deciding they want to keep them home right. 
You know it really depends on the breakdown of the of the groupings and the grades of where that 30 percent is or is it leaning more on one side of the district versus the other uh, it's not as clean as just if it was thirty percent, but yes, spaced across the district. 
That would make it easier. 
We can see some movement, I'm just not sure that I could say for sure right now that it would be at the secondary level. 
We would just need to see where it is and just aggregate that and just look at it, and it also boils down to to 
you know certification areas too, as well. 
How much staff we have in um in each area? 
I fully understand mr scala's position on that. 
I really do understand, but I'm trying to trying to look at this, as if you put out a survey tonight which is already gone, but if you put it out- 
and it said your one mocking period 
and you could change your mind, 
then kind of I would say that you really we're stuck with what we've got this is. 
This is the way it's got to be because you don't know from market period of marketing period, how many students you're going to have. 
Is that accurate? 
Well yeah 
I mean, 
but, but that goes to back to what we said. 
We can't put out there that you can make the decision after each quarter. 
If we're not sure we're going to be able to offer that- 
and so I know it may have looked like it- 
was a little bit stricter than it sounds like the board was- was willing to move forward with 
and so again we're certainly open to putting in alternate language, and we could send it as as quick as you know, as soon as we're done here or first thing in the morning. 
I certainly don't want to prohibit anybody from not doing remote learning 
but um again, it's it's. 
We have to be practical in the size of our school district, so we can't say we're going to be able to offer things that smaller school districts can right away, but it is prohibitive based on on the numbers. 
So, yes, we might be able to offer that 
and we might be able to offer more grades into our secondary schools. 
We might be able to offer more space for our elementary students. 
We just won't know until we see all of those numbers getting to getting that number that we're seeking this weekend will drive uh where we go next, yes, 
and that's why it's challenging to be able to share with our staff and with our community 
what remote learning will you know essentially look like as well? 
If I don't have enough staff, I can't guarantee that you're going to be in a google classroom with a live teacher. 
I might not be able to offer that it may be based on whatever elective or store or grade that you're in it could be some sort of like a live streaming, but but again it really. 
It depends on on the numbers of the students that we have uh up against our staff as well. 
Thank you, jim just just real fast to pick it back. 
I apologize. 
I walked out for a second, if only 75 of the families respond to the survey. 
So now there's 25 of the kids. 
We don't know what they're doing no the default is that they're coming to school. 
Okay, yeah! 
Thank you no problem, so I know with elementary the teachers. 
Usually take their lunch when the students have their lunch. 
How are we working that, if they're having a lunch in the classroom who will be supervising them 
so uh? 
We do have obviously aid support. 
We are also working with our principals because we know that we're probably going to need some additional help with that um, but we also um know that uh. 
You know that lunch is managed um. 
I actually thought that there was some staff that was a part of the lunch periods that might be mistaken. 
Yeah I'd have to look at that um, but we are. 
We are having conversation to ensure that we have um the support we need for lunch, two more. 
Actually. 
What will clubs look like virtually? 
So that's that's another new and exciting uh question right. 
We definitely know that clubs are not going to be able to be maintained after school physically. 
We have started to work with an online platform called passport for good and it allows clubs to run virtually and note on all their activities attendance community service hours if a child is working any of those types of hours. 
So we have to enter into conversation with our teachers about what that could look like. 
We certainly don't want to not offer clubs, but 
you know once a week twice a week: what sort of activities? 
How will you meet with them? 
Will google me be a part of it? 
Those are the questions that we're looking to have moving forward around clubs and one more with the staggered start times. 
Those are students still changing for gym class. 
We will not be changing for gym and we will not need to because we have moved team sports to the end and we're looking to do more um. 
You know personal fitness that isn't rigorous, but no we would not. 
We would not be looking to have any any uh. 
You know contact in that manner for our students 
[Music]. 
As I sat here tonight. 
I thought about saying absolutely nothing 
and I really don't know where to begin. 
I don't have a specific question. 
I can tell you that I'm incredibly angry internally right now uh 
and it's not at anybody in this room, but I thought that uh, I haven't organized my thoughts completely 
they're. 
Just bouncing around in my head, but I want to say a few things. 
First, I want to say that you did an outstanding job in the most difficult of circumstances. 
You've put together a plan. 
Every school district is in the same exact boat that we are in questions asked tonight by rob, 
alex laura meredith 
uh everybody here great questions, uh 
and we don't have the answers to any of those questions 
and we are going to be surprised. 
I think greatly by the things that we find. 
I think that you know people could look at what's going on here tonight 
and they may think that all of us agree on this model and think that this is what we have to do. 
I'm sure there are people watching this tonight 
streaming or we'll watch it later on 
and they'll think that if you're sitting here, I'm sitting here 
and I'm quiet that I must agree with this plan- 
and I think it's wonderful 
and I'm going to tell you that I don't 
it's rotten, it's a rotten plan. 
That's going to do tremendous damage to our children. 
I've been teaching for over 22 years. 
Now I can remember when I started there was goals 2000.
, maybe some people in the room. 
Remember that maybe you don't, then there was no child left behind 
and then most recently there was common core 
there's, never a time in which it seems like a bad idea
, can't come about a bunch of garbage and nonsense that does anything but improves the education of our children. 
As I sat here tonight 
and I watch that slideshow 
and I watch those desks sitting so far apart. 
I thought what kind of dystopian period of time have we entered into where we look at this, and we accept this as the quote-unquote
, what I hate to say the new normal, it's not normal to me. 
It's not acceptable to me. 
I want you to know that if it were up to me solely, I would defy the governor. 
I would send all of our children back to back to school. 
I would give them that opportunity. 
I believe that his edicts are completely unrealistic in terms of delivering a sound education to our children 
and I believe they are not well-based in terms of research and data and so on. 
So when we look at how many children have ended up with covid and what's happened to them, there's no question that covet exists. 
In my mind, I lost one friend to it. 
I almost lost a second several who had it very badly who thought they might lose their lives. 
So there's no question that covet exists. 
However, when I look at the numbers and when I look at children getting covered, what I see is that our response is disproportionate to what is going on and we are willing to just fall in line and listen to the leadership of this state, this country and do these things- 
and I know there are people who feel like me, and 
I know there are people who don't feel like me, a third of the survey respondents who have said I'm not comfortable sending my child to school, and I am all about parental choice. 
If you do not feel comfortable sending your child to school, then I encourage you not to 
I encourage you to homeschool. 
I encourage you to use the remote option if you're not comfortable with that. 
However, I feel, like I've, been denied my choice, which is to send my child to school. 
I'm willing to tolerate that risk based upon what I know, because I think that the damage being done to my child that still is in in school and the damage being done to other children is tremendous. 
I taught remotely for the last what three four months of school and when I tell you that I did as good of a job as anyone could do with live instruction every single day. 
All right. 
I worked very hard to do what I did 
and I watched kids slide into the great abyss and some of those children that I watched slide are supposed to go off. 
The princeton this fall are supposed to go to. 
Cornell are supposed to go to uh. 
You know you name the school 
and and they're going columbia and so on uh. 
But yet I've watched each one of them slip 
and I've watched a few hold on, and I've watched the most needy students that I taught completely slip
, we're not getting that back. 
We are not, and here we are and here's where we're going 
so I'll leave on this particular note. 
Sometimes it's real easy to just go along 
and I feel terrible for people like you, folks, the administration here
, it's simple 
and I'm in the same boat as an educator. 
It's my job! 
It's how I support my family and live my life and as a result of that, I'm forced to comply, because if I don't I'm out of a job but the solutions, we've come up with they're, not good solutions, they're, terrible solutions, and they are solutions that are going to harm each and every one of our children. 
And at some point I do believe that people who feel the way that I feel are going to have to think long and hard about how we stand up and demand what we want for our children that we think is best. 
I just want to say before I ask my last two questions 
that was well said bill. 
I 
I feel exactly the same. 
We do so well said um. 
I just want to talk about um the boces, because we're also feeling some questions today about boces um. 
As I mentioned earlier in the meeting community meeting where there was only 50 people in that meeting, um, where there was only 50 people, there was 50 how many people 50 volunteers 
and then all of our staff as well 
yeah 
go ahead. 
Um, you know. 
Having worked for boces for going into my 29th year, you know over the decades things change school districts go to block schedule. 
Kings park did at one point: um school districts for financial purposes, decided that you know we don't want to send two bus routes to boces. 
We only want to have one route and, as a result, okay, they basically said to our agency look whirly standing in the am this year, or will he sending seniors in the am and juniors in the pm and they've changed things so that it accommodated him and our bosses always accommodated him and my concern with some of the questions with some of the students that are in cte classes, that are that are scheduled to go to carpentry and auto body, and- 
and you know whatever other programs they signed up for- 
is that transportation becomes an issue if we have an a day b day, 
um those particular subject areas you have to be there every day you can't teach somebody how to sand the fender and paint it remotely. 
It's just not something that can happen, so I suggested earlier that maybe we should call boces, uh eastern south post and say look we pay anywhere from 14 to 20 000 tuition depending on the particular student. 
If they have an iep or not or if they need additional services um, we can only stand in the am because of the situation. 
We're in you know and get their feedback. 
You know, I don't believe we. 
I don't think they want to lose the tuition 
yeah. 
No, I agree and 
and uh- 
and you know I did appreciate that idea, because I'm not I 
I know you're in western 
but um it was just you know, shared with us, the model that they were running, and 
so we traditionally we're share 
we're told what our schedule is, but we are quite large 
and I agree with you- 
we pay an exorbitant amount of money into both season. 
It's certainly worth the conversation. 
The second thing we have in-house cte classes where we have cosmetology um, yes and- 
and you know using the same concept- 
I mean if we have to get uh our kids there every single day. 
The suggestion that you know we've we've done in you know boces is that we try to allocate you know: uh the junior students first year, students the am session this way 
they could take that bus up every single day right and just have to get a ride home two two days out of the week 
and then the pm 
students or the second year. 
Students would actually attend cosmetology and pm because many of them may have driver's license and license um. 
It's just another suggestion to be able to accommodate that population of kids. 
That really need to be there five days a week, especially cosmetology students that have licensing and all that stuff which, by the way our cosmetology teacher, I mean she. 
She really just went above and beyond to ensure that the kids had the experience they needed, even if it was virtually. 
So I agree with you 
and I do appreciate uh that feedback and 
then just the last thing is more of a more of a comment 
and it's frustrating because I 
I hear 
what bill saying I hear 
and if you don't mind, I really do uh. 
Mr coggins, I uh. 
I don't want you to think or anybody to think that we just you know, laid low because of our jobs. 
Um. 
I think everybody knows I came from a district where we stood very tall against things that were coming down from the state education department. 
I think when you're talking about health, it's a little bit challenging, but I hope you understand- 
and I hope everyone in the community knows that at no point did. 
I think that I was doing this just because it was my job 
but because I really do want what's best for children like. 
I know all of us here, but I stand just as equally frustrated when you're out 
and you see people out and about in playgrounds and beaches 
and and whatnot 
and we're held to 
you know very different standards. 
But when I tell you that we're working 18, 19 20 hours to make sure we're given the best, I know it's not what we all want, but I do respect what you said 
and I really do appreciate uh that feedback. 
My last thing is really more of a statement and um. 
You know when I look at the guidelines for opening in new york 
and it seems like they print a new one every week, because they change the rules so crazy, um. 
You know you look at them. 
If I can say that you know john, when you said it was cryptic, it really is 
I mean you need to 
you know you can interpret this 50 differently. 
Yes, yes, 
but they have a mandatory column and 
then recommendations for best practices, which I don't understand, but it talks about um ensure that social distancing, six feet uh at least six feet or a physical barrier is maintained between individuals while in school facilities on school grounds, including cafeterias, unless safety or care of activities such as moving equipment or elevating elevators traveling in common areas requires shorter distance of individuals. 
But then number two says: if social distancing is not possible, individuals must wear acceptable face governments 
yep, that's exactly how we interpret what we talked about earlier if we have to move kids back into a classroom. 
The way I interpret this- and maybe legal legal counsel, give me you know their opinion right 
is that if we had to move desks closer together, okay to be able to not be able to, you know, uh accommodate the social distancing by putting masks on the kids, we would be able to do that 
and that's exactly how we started out our planning. 
If you remember we had looked at, I think it was the massachusetts model where we were looking to at least go no less than three feet 
and when we did that it was like 
everyone's high fiving 
each other everyone's coming back. 
This is great 
and I don't mean to put mr block on the spot, but we did receive guidance from legal and it looked as though that masks were not going to be appropriate alone, but we read the regulations the same as you. 
It was just as disappointing when we found out that was not to be mr o'keefe. 
The other day, um you'd mention that if we were able to go three feet, we could accommodate every student. 
Every kid come back. 
Every student we had every building make up a class for three feet, and so we were able to say that if parents felt safe for their children to return that we were able to do that our hands are very tied um. 
In terms of that, and you know again, I don't mean to put you on the spot, mr black, but you may want to jump in 
then it was a few weeks ago where you know we thought that just mask face covering was going to be sufficient. 
If you couldn't maintain the social distancing uh, but then the governor's office came out and clarified that and said that no you have to have that physical barrier and um. 
So that then took away our what we thought was our ability to have face masks, but the face coverings are okay in the hallways and the bus. 
Yes, 
well, yeah, there's! 
No! 
It's not that's! 
Yes, nothing makes sense, but that is uh. 
That's 
that's what we're following so 
aaron um. 
As we all know, I should have had a swivel chair, john 
I'm just saying. 
Should I have a swivel chair, as we all know, um education is is not going to be pretty this year um 
and we want to give our children as much as we can 
and we've spent so many years working on this educating the whole child and worrying about social, emotional. 
I'm
, the most emotional person shouldn't be talking about this, but um. 
So a couple of things, our most vulnerable, social and emotional. 
As we see little children adapt much better. 
You see a two-year-old in target with a mask on it's, not a problem. 
Um, my teenagers find the mask, uncomfortable and, and 
so um hours. 
Six through 12, in my opinion, are our most mentally vulnerable 
and I just feel like um, because things are so different. 
Are they going to be able to just go down to the guidance counselor 
just go down to you know, or things like that like like, where they want to just go. 
Take five minutes with the guidance counselor or even the school psychologist. 
Is that still going to be fully in place opened to everyone? 
Is there also? 
I know that um. 
I know that over the the distance learning period last year that our sagem north um sel chairs they 
they did a tremendous job. 
Having a google meet also are are things for mental health in place 
and then my other question is 
what does recess look like in um in covid land in elementary um? 
I think 
yeah, 
because I think I lightly brushed over that. 
So I'm glad that you asked me about that 
because you know 
so last year was the big thing that we were taking away: five minutes from lunch and recess and uh see, there's always bigger fish to fry people um. 
So, with that they're gonna be allowed to go outside 
they're gonna be allowed to run it all off. 
Are they allowed to play on the play gyms? 
Are they allowed to play ball with one another, or is it 
you're going to stay there and just run in place 
and you're going to stay there and run in place 
and yeah? 
I mean, I think. 
Realistically they are children, we're going to do our best to set up so that it's a safe environment, but there's not going to be boredoms out there if they are playing ball. 
I can't tell you that we will they're going to be, as I said earlier, rotating between the fields that we have the playground equipment that we have and then the basketball courts, so we would obviously have equipment outside for that. 
We do have sanitizing stations that we will be utilizing for the students but 
again um. 
You know, as I said I think in the beginning. 
We do not want our students to come back feeling like we're in jail, and the first thing that we had on our slides was the social, emotional well-being of our students 
and I'm very proud of the program that we have built here, and we are just looking for unique ways whether it be virtual, more push in from our sel chairs. 
You know all project kindness, all of those things we'll still have them this year. 
They just may look a little bit different in terms of the mental health staff, ms graham and the office of student services. 
Now under the direction of mram better with ms graham, we will be deploying guidance counselor. 
All of those different all of those services are still in place, but we see ourselves doing more proactive lessons as students come in and more 
push in into our classrooms, so that students feel comfortable. 
We know the issues that we're seeing out there again. 
Our sel chairs have sent out a survey to our students at the secondary level, and I agree with you at the elementary level we're going to be doing more proactive, resiliency skill type of activities with them. 
Our health teachers for the past year have been building a health workbook for the elementary schools that are rooted in all the resiliency skills that we have been studying using the university of uh pennsylvania. 
So we're really excited about what we can deploy for our students, and 
you know it goes back to yes
, we are so worried about curriculum 
and we are we are. 
We are going to work to ensure that all big ideas as much as we possibly can until this is all over is taught, but our first charge is just making sure that those kids feel happy and safe and healthy coming in and our staff as well. 
Our staff has not only been teaching from home uh prior to the summer, but they also had their own issues that they may have been you know undergoing. 
So that is our number one goal here. 
Thank you no problem, mr keith. 
Mr science. 
Uh. 
One of the important questions that was asked this morning was about safety and about how kids are wearing their masks on the bus 
they're getting off the bus 
and now they're walking into the building with their masks on maybe a hood on, maybe a hat on 
and they're not going to be as easily identifiable as they have in the past. 
One of the suggestions was to wear lanyards with 
maybe id cards. 
I'm just wondering what else. 
If there's any other suggestions, if there's, how are we gonna, I mean? 
Obviously health and safety is number one concern that that is a that is a major concern of not being able to recognize kids and especially, ninth graders, who are now new to the building. 
So we don't know any of them to begin with, and and sixth graders are now going in there right. 
So there's going to be a lot of unfamiliar faces and even more unfamiliar with me. 
Well, so not too unfamiliar only because we do have our transition meetings for all fifth graders going into the sixth grade 
and then all eighth graders going into the ninth grade, and we did those virtually over the past few months prior to the ending of school. 
So all teams at the high school level, in conjunction with their middle school and then middle school to elementary school. 
We met on every single student, not just some, but all so they were able to physically see a picture of the student talk about the student all of those things, so so we're hoping right that there are similar, uh some familiar faces coming in 
but, like we had talked about this morning, the use of the student badges. 
We have never truly enforced the way that we need to now, but we would have to ensure that the students are maintaining that and showing that because they will be wearing masks as they come in. 
However, we are also spacing things out, so the kids aren't coming into school in mass quantities, so should, in fact you know, prior to all the badges coming out. 
You need to slip down just so. 
We can kind of recognize you put back up and go back in. 
I think we would feel safe and comfortable in terms of that, but we'll be working with our staff working with security and seeing what other measures that we can um, you know put into place. 
John. 
I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that. 
Just to pick it back up. 
If we're going to have the kids wear their 
id cards just a matter of how fast can we get the idea? 
Yeah? 
That's 
the that's the only thing, and that's why I say in the beginning. 
We may just have to do the old-fashioned, put it down for a second, so I can see, but you know our staff is pretty astute and granted the ninth graders uh. 
We may not recognize them all, but 
we all you know. 
We know our students here 
so um, that's obviously 
another concern would be now 
we have them wearing their id cards and of course, we all know that 10 to 15 of the kids are either going to lose them or forget them. 
Do we have a mechanism to reprint them in the building daily so that everybody has one um? 
Thank you, okay, 
so just for the community, we we are able to duplicate that. 
Yes, thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss any other questions we moved on. 
I just wanted to make sure that we at least took a poll of where we stand. 
As on remote learning, did we want to take a poll and leave it at one full year of a commitment? 
Did we want to talk about a half year? 
Did we want to talk about a quarter? 
I think it's important that we do it now, so that we don't wait until last. 
Second and we're changing yes 
[Music]. I understand what rob was saying before about this. 
I'm just curious why it wouldn't be sufficient if we just changed the language to where we could evaluate if it were possible and had people understand that it could potentially be that long, but we could, of course, if situations allow we can, we can, we can shorten it and truncate the time period. 
Can I just ask a question to mr block: 
I mean I 
just just because I can foresee I'm sorry jim just because I can foresee something are 
we are 
we even legally allowed to tell somebody they're not allowed to come back? 
That's you know
, that's 
a that's an unanswered question. 
You know 
and it's unprecedented um from a legal standpoint, and 
you know I understand fully the operational issues from a legal standpoint. 
You're going to want to see more flexibility, because the concern is that family will say that being denied. 
My right education, it responds back, is no you're being educated, being educated remotely, but that's not the same type of education as an in-person education. 
So from a legal standpoint, I would recommend that there be some flexibility built in. 
I was actually going to state that if you were going to do that, um still keep the year uh, but have a reevaluation the ability to be able to re-evaluate, as ms heinz said, that that's going to occur on a student-by-student basis. 
Anyway, if there's a concern from a parent, but parents are maybe being a little bit um, not almost like misled, but don't not aware of the fact that there may be a re-evaluation, but that's something you may want to clarify, and you could do it in an interval period. 
You could do it. 
You know after the first quarter, 
yeah, 
that's as a re-evaluation, for example. 
Yeah 
I mean 
yeah. 
One of my concerns would be is that they realize what remote learning entails and they're like I. 
This is not what I signed up for we're not going live, we're not doing this or not right, and then we get an influx of kids and now class sizes grow 
and we don't have the space to have everybody in. 
So I just I want to make sure that we have that flexibility
, I'm sorry jim 
[
Music]. Well, my position is I like what bill just said. 
My position was to get the true figures. 
The way it went out was probably the right way to go, so people aren't saying. 
Well, I can experiment for a while 
and we never really get a true picture, but 
at the same time I think if you put it if the language was softened up to say, the possibility of a full year is real uh. 
However, you know there's going to be uh, independent cases that have changed, etc, etc. 
So we all know that we all know that this could all change, but to get the true figure up front. 
I think they have to be aware that this could be a full year of remote learning. 
Uh. 
Yes, that's just my opinion. 
Yeah 
and I apologize. 
I don't have the survey in front of me. 
I don't, I think I said could be, but I don't recall, but we could certainly again put that out once we see the numbers and if, in fact we feel like, maybe families felt a little bit um, it was too strong and they're, not really quite sure we can. 
We could send a call out. 
We could send out an email as quick as you know now, if we wanted to the reason why I asked that question 
is: is that we based that plan on every single student returning? 
Yes, we did 
so the issue is not space. 
The issue is scheduling. 
Yes, that's correct right! 
Yes, so I view it as well and and because of the six feet right, you know obviously space because of that, but the six feet parameters is what allowed us to go to this plane to accommodate every kid. 
They should be right. 
So if we don't have all if, if not all kids return, then we will have more space, obviously and then can bring back more kids. 
So so the thing is like I said: the issue is not the space matter. 
You know the plan was devised based upon every single student returning and that's why I suggested you know, maybe doing it once you know one or four times a year um. 
You know. 
For that reason, I understand that it could be a nightmare scheduling. 
Well if the restrictions aren't lifted, I guess we have 13 kids. 
In a seventh grade, honest math class 
and we're looking at a schedule, you're going to look at the section 
say all right put them in mrs smith's class or put them in yes correct. 
Yes, so you know the issue is that you have this. 
You have the space, it's just more of a scheduling thing, and I would imagine that if more and more kids come back from remote learning, we could reassign teachers to classrooms. 
Yes, well, and- 
and that's the point right 
so in a year where we're already saying the curriculum's interrupted the day has been corrupted. 
That's the only thing that we wanted to minimize in the beginning and get a true account, because you don't want to be moving teachers around and upheaving schedules, but we can of course always hand select and uh. 
You know put students in as outliers who really do need to come back, but we didn't want to forget. 
I don't know who said it before. 
We just didn't want people thinking, I'm going to try it out for a week 
and if I don't like it I'll, go because we're just. 
That would be really good. 
A quarter um you know, and that will give us enough time to do the planning and do the scheduling if we have, if we had to. 
I just think that the one year signing something this is one year, scaring heck out of people based upon the phone calls that I received today. 
So I guess we'll have to then decide. 
Are we doing flexibility? 
The flexible option, obviously is the best for everybody, but do we want to say one year or do we want to say by quarter, and I guess we'll vote on that. 
So if you want to do a full year, write it with flexibility, you can vote on that full year. 
Flexibility, yes, so just put we'll put our hands up 
and I'll 
just we'll count them all full year with flexibility or flexibility with re-evaluating every quarter. 
Okay, so yes, but maybe we could put what would be the best way to well 
yeah. 
I think that what I suggested would be if you want to stay with the full year, but that you re-evaluate on a quarterly basis 
yeah, 
because I just caution us to if we all of a sudden say flexibility, then people
, you know I 
just we have to have a true account. 
School starts in two and a half weeks, and I 
I don't mean to be crafts about that, but 
we we really do, and so I think, mr black, the way that you had said it um. 
I think you know it's a year, but we would be reevaluating it throughout the year for everybody. 
I I 
I like what he said. 
Does that mean? 
No? 
I don't think that you're going to make that full commitment. 
I don't think you can quite frankly 
yeah. 
So I think that the concern was being raised was that parents, under the impression that you know no matter what I do 
it's a year now, 
if I commit it's a full year, that's not going to be the case. 
We're going to look at it on a quarterly basis. 
Again, it's change. 
There could be a week wake up tomorrow with an executive order which states that parents, you know, can make the choice on daily basis. 
You know 
so um you know, so I uh. 
I think that what it's going to be is that the district will look at it. 
We're going to look at our operational needs, we're going to look at the parental needs and make you know an informed decision, but that the benchmark be on a quarterly basis. 
Would it help if we provided some sample language 
and then you're able to let us know if that language looks appropriate, because we can send that out. 
You know as quick as uh. 
You know sunday evening or monday morning for folks perfect. 
Thank you any other questions. 
All right. 
We are back in the agenda letter f approval of minutes. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr mike caruso second and by meredith opie. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried number two. 
We are in the visitors section public comment that pertains to the agenda. 
I'm just going to need those cards 
or, if you're going to call them, is fine too 
yeah 
sure I'm going to call up the names we do have several. 
I just wanted to make a reminder announcement that the visitor section, the public comment is in fact a public comment. 
It's not a question and answer type of period, so I know that some of the cards that we are getting do have questions on them. 
I think possibly it's better. 
You know to if, if questions are asked, we can have them written down and we can take your email and we can have a response sent to you by email. 
If that's good or mr picarella, if you want, we can also include them in our forum on monday. 
That's fine right 
yeah. 
I just think it would possibly be best to email 
or you know, speak with you separately regarding 
okay, um. 
So the first gentleman, mr caputo
, I'm sorry capuano, 
oh okay, my name is mike capuano. 
My daughter is brooke capuano. 
She goes to sagem, you have an excellent school here and you have an excellent school because you have the best teachers in the country. 
I believe, when you take the teachers away, you have a bunch of buildings here: 
okay, uh, to think that you're going to lock a child in a room with a bunch of books 
and if you could fast forward 10 years that, like a doctor or a lawyer, is going to walk out of that room. 
It's just not going to happen. 
Okay, now the main reason that we're all here is the six foot: six foot: six foot: six foot- 
that's all we're here for why? 
Don't we tell everybody that that's a farce? 
If you build the partitions around the desk, the six foot is not necessary and I called osha 
and I called the governor's hotline. 
Okay, if you build the glass petition, the teachers are worried. 
Also. 
I understand that if you build a glass petition against the front, the teachers could walk in the back and they would be behind the petition. 
711 protects their cashiers and they all come in when it's time for their shift 
and they're back there. 
Furthermore, the children could walk in behind their petitions and take their masks off. 
The teachers could be up there with the blackboards and take their masks off and everything would be back to normal. 
This is all we're all here, because we're refusing to build the petitions. 
You could take that desk. 
There's schools that have taken that desk 
and they divide it like this boom and boom 
and there's four children on that desk 
and it's totally legal you can be. 
When you put a mask on then or any kind of petition, they said you could be nose to nose. 
I was just in a restaurant that was so packed the booth, the person right behind me 
I turned around. 
I was looking right in his face. 
I called the hotline from there 
because- 
and they said as long as there's a petition, there was a petition in between the booths and the petition 
was only this tall. 
I was looking in the guy's eyes 
and they said there's no regulations for the height of the petition. 
Okay, so all we need is the petition, and all this is gone. 
Okay, second of all, second solution: why don't you just have the people that want to come into school and the teachers that want to come into school come in and the ones that want to stay home and the children that want to stay home stay home instead of forcing the ones that are horrified to come in to come in and the ones that are desperate to come back in. 
My daughter wants her teachers and she wants her school 
and she wants her friends. 
Okay, what? 
If all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in? 
Everybody who needed to came in to to help 
and they kept america going to mind odds that the schools are the only ones that let us down now, as this gentleman said these kids in five years, if we could fast forward to the ones that are starting now, they won't be able to read and write. 
I don't know how many people go to europe, but our kids already can't read and write. 
We are kids in college. 
That can't add this 
is the death knell of america. 
This is not some small thing here that you're deciding 
and there's no reason. 
These are guidelines. 
Schools all around you hop hog everything else open five days. 
This is your decision to do in the generation right here. 
Remember that this is the beginning of the end of america, okay, god. 
We hope that they rescind this, but if they don't rescind this, this few years here will be known as the covid dummies. 
They won't make it into college. 
They won't do anything and there's no reason 
and anyway. 
Lastly, I want to say, if you open the schools, why bother the first kid or the first teacher that gets covered you're going to close all of sagem? 
So this is all the foss all this money, the reopening programs and everything. 
It's all a big fuss, 
okay, it's it because this is being treated like the bubonic plague. 
Mr capuano, I'm sorry there's a three minute time limit. 
Okay, thank you. 
Studies all around the world have opened up. 
There's not one case. 
The ymca tracked their own tracing 40, 000. 
Kids, not one mr kevin. 
Thank you very much for coming. 
We appreciate it. 
Thank you so much for listening 
and I wanna say. 
Lastly, the governor said this is for us to talk not three minutes. 
I listened to this young lady for three hours. 
That was not the guidelines. 
You're worried about guidelines, guidelines, the governor said the people should be able to come in and talk not listen to. 
You guys tell me what to do with my child. 
Okay. 
Thank you very much. 
Okay, uh miss uh muchitash. 
Please can I just start sure 
yeah 
um hi, my name is lauren mukhitash 
um I've been in station for 13 years 
now I have elementary age children, I'm going to jump the agenda. 
Oh I'm sorry
, um, I'm going to jump the agenda a little bit uh and go to item 12. 
um there's been a proposal to create a divor diversity task force in sacrum, central school district. 
I'm here to voice my support for the creation of that task. 
Force sachem student body is comprised of 25 percent racial minority students. 
Our e and l students represent a staggering 98 different languages spoken within this district of 13 000 students. 
Our students represent a multitude of cultures, religions and abilities representation matters. 
Our multifaceted student body deserves to see themselves reflected in their teachers and administrators in the books they have access to and read 
and then the curriculum they are taught. 
So I would just plead with the board. 
Please don't render this to a toothless subcommittee with no power. 
There are lots of things that I love about sagem, and I think that this is a step in the direction to improve upon what we already have a strong foundation for. 
Thank you. 
I'm sorry. 
Next is uh. 
Mr warren hi uh, my name is jason moore, I'm a parent in the community, uh sageman graduate. 
I would like to make a plea to the board: please value and respect the school community by maintaining a high standard of transparency and communication at all times, but particularly in times of crisis. 
The communication from the central office and the board has been unacceptable. 
It is essential for every member of the school community students, teachers and families to be constantly updated at all times about every aspect of the reopening process. 
The meeting this meeting was not advertised to the school community at large. 
There were five parents outside barely and they left please as soon as possible, communicate the following. 
Please communicate the following to community immediately. 
How will we ensure that our remote students are receiving an equitable education? 
I can't accept that they will receive a subpar education. 
You've put in your email that I received. 
While I was standing up front says it will not be the same. 
I need it to be equitable. 
I need my child to get an equitable education. 
They need to be live instruction and ongoing assessment. 
We need to figure it out. 
We need to put programmers in place. 
We need to figure it out. 
It has to be figured out. 
We cannot make an exception where part of our school community is receiving a subpar education. 
It's not acceptable, not acceptable to me should not be acceptable to you 
and it's not acceptable to your teaching staff. 
I know that for a fact. 
Secondly, a building space plan must be made available to the teacher to the parents of this community with individual room measurements and the capacity to maintain authentic social distancing at all times, and I need to know about the source of ventilation. 
I need to know what the school buildings look like. 
If you're telling me 17 kids in a classroom, I need to know that there's room for 42 square feet for every 17 one of those students I need. 
I need that in writing. 
Before I even think about sending my child back, I need clear opportunities for all parents to participate in this process. 
I shouldn't stumble upon this. 
I should be knowing about this weeks in advance. 
I need specific criteria for testing and tracing in all school buildings. 
I need a contingency plan for what happens when the rate of transmission rises above three percent. 
What do I do with my child? 
How do I make accommodations? 
I need to know these things before we put our kids on those buses. 
It's unacceptable that you're asking me to put a remote survey in place by friday, and your first parent meeting is on monday. 
That's unacceptable. 
The parents need to know. 
What's going on, the school community needs to know. 
What's going on, the teachers need to know, everybody needs to know it's unacceptable, please. 
I need you to do a better job of communicating with the school community. 
Most important details need to be related to about our children's education in the future. 
Please address these issues immediately. 
The students, the teachers, the families in this community deserve at least this much. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much. 
Miss favaro campbell hi, I'm michelle for campbell. 
I wanted to just address the board about the diversity task force. 
As all of you know, I started that email and requested that it be put on the agenda and that you all consider creating one. 
It's been 10 years that I, my daughter, started 
well she's going to be a senior now 
so 10 years ago I actually started talking to a lot of district office, which is very changed now. 
Maybe mr scavo might have been on the board of ed 
back then I don't remember, but most of you are not 
we're not then um. 
It's been 10 years, since my family started talking about the having more diversity and representation within sachem 
and I'm really excited to see it finally make an agenda. 
I want to also make it really clear that it's about race, religion and abilities. 
I want children in wheelchairs to see themselves in books in their classrooms. 
I want children with autism to know that they are just as represented as every other kid in every princess book in every superhero story, and I want to help show our curriculum expand to teach children that kids with down syndrome can be teachers, because there are stories of preschool teachers who have down syndrome and kids, who are deaf and blind can grow up to graduate harvard law, school and become disability advocates and travel the entire world, and 
I right now we just don't show that we don't have the staff. 
We don't have diversity in our staff. 
We don't have diversity even in the books that they see when they walk into a classroom. 
So I just wanted to thank you all for putting it on the agenda tonight and for entertaining the idea and to understand that it's actually bigger than one issue, it's about every kid at sagem walking into their classroom, walking through hallways and right now, where I know reopening and dealing with covid, but this has been 10 years actually a little bit more in the making and sacrum 
is going to go on long before my daughter, who's going to be a senior and my son is going to be a freshman in high school 
they're going to be gone, and I don't want to leave that task force 
like I want this to be 10 years from now. 
Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program has a very different experience than what they had, and so that's really important to me that you all knew that. 
So. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss sanders, hello, everyone, 
oh hello, everyone, maria sanders, um! 
I am a parent um. 
I would like to just make a statement um in respect to the reopening committee. 
I 
I was a member of the reopening committee 
and I just would like to express my disappointment in the fact that the committee had no part in the actual planning or process of of the plan that was presented to the community. 
My understanding was that we would be part of that process, but instead we had two meetings where we were basically given the list of directives as administration and and the board of vet had planned. 
So basically, we got a sneak peek and the ability to ask a few questions, though I certainly respect the time and effort and energy that administrators put in, and I will not take anything away from that. 
You fail to utilize the very volunteers that you asked for because there was a tremendous amount of talent within that grouping 
and we certainly could have helped you in putting together this plan for myself having students in second in middle school and high school. 
I recognize that this plan is not going to be adequate for them and again, though
, I understand right now, we we're hoping that the testing standards are loosened. 
The value of a full-time education will not be, and these children cannot get a full-time education when they're in school. 
Fifty percent of the time they're only seeing a teacher, fifty percent of the time 
and they're 
they're sitting home in front of a computer for the other 50 that amounts to 10 days a month when normally they would be in school for five days a week. 
So I just asked that in the future, when you come to the community- 
and you ask us to step up and come in and help you really utilize us, because our voice really has not been heard. 
That's it! 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Uh miss williamson, nicole williamson, okay, uh, miss cologne, 
hi everyone, I'm josephine scalon. 
I have a soon to be second and third grader, and I just have a question because I'm still undecided about the virtual verse going to action school. 
If you go to school and you start in the school, do you have the option of then going virtual? 
Would that be an option? 
So I'm sorry go ahead. 
I'm sorry! 
So we're in this portion of the agenda. 
We're not allowed to do back and forth and answer questions. 
If you'd like we can have your question written down and leave your contact and we will answer any question that you have. 
I can promise thanks. 
Thank you very much. 
Is it allison? 
Is it on the court? 
Is her email on the card? 
There's a phone number on the card. 
Do you want to put an email perfect? 
Thank you so much um, the next one was also um several questions. 
Would you prefer to contact this person as well? 
I mean 
I mean he's been waiting, so if he wants to ask him 
and then it's miss rep rapuno, okay, thank you, 
yeah! 
That's all! 
For the first section uh we are on page two at the bottom number. 
Three business items consent agenda a through c, 
and I have a motion. 
Please motion by bill cogan second, by laura slattery. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried sorry bottom of page three personnel consent agenda. 
A through 
l. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
This is kate bleedin. 
So this is an unusual way to welcome many of our new staff, as we um are having our first kind of live forum most of the time we have folks here to welcome them in person, and some of you are virtual. 
We would like to welcome all of our new staff that we vetted through really intense interview processes this summer with our administrative staffs in the building and staff members, uh faculty uh involved in the whole process and 
um. 
That includes clerical custodial teachers, teachers, assistants 
and I think we have also gotten to um the administrative section. 
Did I catch that correctly? 
Okay, so we're through the l- 
and I just want to welcome those folks that are in consent, agendas, uh. 
So far, thanks number five is support staff consent agenda a through j. 
Can I please have a motion motion by meredith second, by jimmy and caruso. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried christie. 
Did you want me to stop again 
yeah 
cause? 
I think you have michael there. 
Yep uh joining us today is michael emanuel um. 
He is over here to my left, 
the far right, if you wanted to just stand and give yourself a wave, uh michael, is joining us today, as the network and systems administrator he's been a integral part of our technology, um staff who have been working with jack renda in it. 
We're really excited about all the great things that we're going to continue to get the growth for our technology as we push through and put our smart schools um investment through and and enhance the use of our technology for our students and our staff. 
So welcome michael, we are on the top of page 12 number six personnel administrators consent agenda. 
A through g motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
okay, we'd like to take a moment to recognize two other folks in the uh audience today. 
Uh joining us is dennis mcelherne um. 
If you want to give a wave- 
not quite sorry, I'm trying to stay on top of it here. 
They're. 
This close, this close sorry guys a little more suspense we're going to be towards the top of page 14 
letter h, probationary appointment of the administrative personnel. 
There you go andy. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr coggins? 
Second by mr wadawa discussion, discussion um. 
I will be voting uh no on this in the next two personnel items. 
Uh. 
My reasons are the same as they've been for the past several board meetings concerning central administrative positions. 
That is, I believe, the new superintendent should be part of the process in any administrative appointments. 
Uh. 
What I must make perfectly clear is that these candidates, as well as those from the prior meetings, are qualified and capable of the positions to which they are being offered, and I would fully support them if the new superintendent was part of the process. 
So this is a process, negative vote and nothing to do with the personnel uh. 
The new superintendent is close. 
I mean we're almost there 
and we certainly have qualified staff who could perform these functions for a short time as interims, so that for that reason, and that reason alone, I'm voting no on the next three administrative positions. 
I must stress it has nothing to do with the individuals. 
I fully support them and would support them in the future. 
Mr kieran, just because you asked for a discussion and for the public and anybody at home by losing our superintendent, our assistant superintendent and our special ed director, we would have left three positions open where we would have needed interims and just for argument's sake, mr o'keefe. 
What is the going rate for an interim at that level per day? 
For which position are we speaking? 
Let's say it's: the superintendent um rates vary, but a going rate for superintendent is probably 12 to 1300 a day, and then what about the assistant super? 
An assistant superintendent, depending upon which position it could be 800 to 1000 a day and an executive director of special ed would also probably be in a similar range, a minimum of 800 a day. 
So what and- 
and I don't necessarily disagree with your argument- 
but what what we did was 
we took a vote to have these positions filled. 
We had three people doing five people's jobs and it between losing that on a normal year is almost impossible, but losing it during covet is is impossible um and we put things into motion to have these positions filled by qualified people to save that money, and this is money that 
I mean we 
we already just talked about taking custodians off- 
that we don't even know if buildings are going to get cleaned in time. 
Now we want to take more money out by filling these positions with indoors. 
I think that that's a slippery slope if we go down that path. 
Well, I appreciate what you're saying uh my my uh. 
My position is that a superintendent of schools, uh, is the single most important person in the district and totally accountable to us and the district for making decisions and to have a superintendent of schools, not part of the process. 
Even though a new superintendent come in and doesn't know, the personnel is certainly going to ask the qualified people who who they are and do cement and be part of the interview process. 
I 
I think that's even more important than the saving of a few dollars here and there, 
but that's 
I mean 
I
, I see I'm alone in that position, but I stand by it. 
I 
I understand where you're coming from I just if I don't appoint somebody until september 1, that's a long period of time at thirteen hundred dollars a day, eight hundred dollars a day, and while it seems like a few dollars here and there over a three month period that we haven't had people that it starts to add up, and when we need money down the line, I would be afraid that we put it on in a room 
is when we had qualified people who could take these positions immediately? 
I will remind you of your fiscal prudence soon, 
[Laughter] alex just because we're having a discussion, so mr kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight, I I have personally known all of them. 
So it's without hesitation that I think that they are the best fit for sachem. 
I don't care who our superintendent is. 
I've trusted mr o'keefe, as our interim superintendent, to make the recommendations, and I 100 percent agree that any superintendent coming in will not find any better candidates than the ones we're putting forth tonight. 
Opposed motion is carried dennis uh, we're going to start with andrew larson, 
so andrew just want to welcome you to the high school north principalship 
um, andy has been a teacher in our schools. 
He's been in personnel, he's been in an elementary hiawatha principleship, a sagamore principalship, an ap and two of our high schools, uh and now he's joining the ranks of the leader um ship in north 
and we'd like to welcome you and wish you all the best we are on letter. 
I probationary appointment of the executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion. 
Please motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
[Applause] dennis mclehern. 
He's 
he's welcome back to sacham. 
He has been in our school district working as a school psychologist, an assistant to uh coordinator for special education. 
He left for a short stint to go over to north bab as a director over there 
and we're really lucky to have him back and part of our team as the executive assist executive director for special education. 
Welcome back [Applause] and letter j is an approval of an saa agreement for the executive executive director for special education. 
Can I please have a motion motion by ms slattery? 
Second, if I miss volpe, all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 14. 
contracts consent agenda. 
A through t. 
Can I please have a motion ocean by mr coggins second by mrs wadwa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried. 
We are on the bottom of page 20.. 
It's an action, itemist number, a mandated new york state board, training for matthew, bauman and robert scavo, all in favor, 
get kind of a motion motion by mrs volpe second by mr man. 
Caruso all in favor opposed motion is carried number 
b. 
It's an appointment of board committee members. 
Can I please have a motion motion by miss lottery second by mr scavo. 
Any questions all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
Letter c. 
Is a board of education retreat? 
Can I please have a motion motion by ms wado, a second by mr bauman, all in favor. 
Any questions sure I just want to make a quick comment: um, especially since we're being fiscally prudent, a retreat is not like gurneys or something 
it's where we all sit in a room and talk. 
I just want to make sure that that's clear, because we are not going on vacation, though, because my first year I was prepared for gurney's 
and then we sat in the same set library. 
Thank you. 
We are on the top of page 22.. 
I'm sorry 
are we 
I apologize. 
Can I uh all in favor opposed motion is carried the top of page 22 donations consent agenda a through c. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr coggin second by miss ottawa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried number 10 at the bottom of page 22 committee on special education consent agenda, a through b motion by miss volpe. 
Second by mr mancaruso, all in favor opposed motion is carried number 11 monthly reports. 
So we there was a question from the community about when the committees would start meeting and how I think that, maybe, if people that were leading these committees, we want to maybe set some dates. 
We could do something virtually I'd like to see the budget committee start talking about if there was a possible mid-year cut and look into any and all options that there was. 
I don't know if there was anything else that you may want to look into, but that's just one that I thought of. 
I don't know about the legislative committee. 
If mr kiernan has anything for the legislative committee, okay, all right number, 12, we are back on public comment. 
This portion of the public comment will be on any and all items that anybody wants to speak at. 
That's not on the agenda, and everyone will have three minutes to discuss and, like we said before, this is not a q a and a back and forth, but we do want everyone to be able to be heard. 
That wants to be heard. 
Okay, the first one is miss young 
[Music]. Oh, I press this. 
Yes, thank you for waiting for so long. 
Thank you. 
You guys have been outside the season board of education, members and community. 
It's come to my attention that vp sarah waterworld wore a bill. 
Okay, okay, we're a blm t-shirt at a board of education meeting. 
This is unacceptable. 
I can respect a person's right to free speech and to have their opinion. 
However, blm is a political movement and it does not belong at our border bed meetings or in our schools and indoctrinations. 
The definition of a racist is paramount in the name of black lives matter. 
The name indicates that black lives matter over the other races. 
This is unacceptable and this racism does not belong, including the blm is putting itself over our law enforcement, which many of our community are employed and of all races this once again making blm a black organization. 
Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has they have not registered as a charitable organization. 
We do not know whether the blm t-shirt, that was worn was for the black lives foundation or movement in either case. 
It has no right 
if any one of the board members wore my hat supporting trump, I'm sure the same thing would happen. 
The apology that was put on facebook was cynical and scolding. 
Call us as all races and insisting blm is not is not a political issue. 
Last I checked. 
Everyone in america had the same rights regardless of race, sex, color and sexual orientation. 
As specific cases of discrimination are happening in our community, then we must address those issues. 
What offended me is the use of rap music before sporting events, glorifying women's segregation, drug use and the cursing and the songs with the word and in it this is not acceptable. 
If we are going to talk about discrimination, it can it's got to be used both ways. 
So, let's start by banning that bml, not political, tell that to the murder black trump supporter bernal tramell. 
Furthermore, the disgusting political use of blm as an attack on our police and blue lives is not acceptable. 
Our community of all sects and races is made up of law enforcement. 
Blm is declaring war against all blue lives matter. 
Miss young there's a three-minute time limit. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much, miss o'connell, so conor. 
Thank you very much for waiting. 
I know that it's been a while 
okay. 
Well, I am beyond angry at what is going on with our children. 
Okay, we are not doing the right thing by our children in any way, shape or form at this point in time whether we want to send our children to school or keep them home. 
Neither of those options currently are acceptable. 
I sent everybody board members in email. 
I got one reply challenged every one of your board members to go and spend 10 minutes in one of the one of the classrooms. 
On the first floor in the second floor of one of the high schools did any of you do that 
yeah? 
I didn't think so. 
Yet you all think it's fine, obviously that we have no ventilation in the classrooms for crying out loud. 
We have to have special ventilation in the malls and other businesses, but where our most vulnerable are we don't? 
None of you would work in these classrooms in the current conditions, none of you. 
So why would you think it's okay for our children to be in there even before this, but definitely now now the air in those classrooms just stands there, because there's no movement, 
there's, no, 
nothing and covert will stand in the air until it falls down on somebody 
so you're putting our children in an environment that is guaranteeing that if somebody has gold, but it's going to get on all the rest of them 
horrendous, it's despicable and 
now I'm hearing that remote learning is going to be a joke. 
That's not okay! 
Either! 
Okay, I don't want my child in one of those rooms. 
I want my child safe, but my child is taking five ap classes next year, which means he needs a robust distance learning program. 
But my understanding is we're not doing that. 
Am I incorrect? 
No okay. 
So what we're doing to our children is despicable and you should all be ashamed of yourself just a second. 
Mr block, just a second, mr kyle 
I'll get your answer question right now. 
I had a conversation with him. 
You know, I know that you were asking the question about the uh being restricted in terms of the assembly 
yeah, 
but it's pursuant to the governor's executive order, one of the number of executive orders 202.45, I looked. 
I believe I looked at that one, and that was talking about social media. 
This is okay, 
I'm just gonna back up just a little bit 
just so we can keep our space now. 
It talks about non-essential gatherings. 
Yes, and this is not essential. 
That's correct as long as while we're virtual, because you still have the option of being virtual, the board decided to assemble. 
Oh so so you guys decided. 
This was not essential. 
So because you decided the governor, that's not that they don't decide. 
No! 
So who decides well, there's based upon the governor's orders. 
The governor said that this is an honest. 
The governor said that we can conduct this meeting virtually or yes, 
you can 
yes 
but 
yeah. 
So as long as you can conduct it, virtually meeting is considered to be non-essential because you have the ability to be able to connect the virtual reality. 
Okay, thanks thank you for that. 
It's, mr black, so 202.45 it was extended by 202.53 
and it's in effect, until august 20th, 
okay, next fury good evening, I'm a proud sacrum educator and a parent of three daughters who attend sageman schools. 
I'm here tonight to voice my concerns regarding the secondary reentry plan. 
I have a daughter in eighth grade 
and I also have a senior. 
I have grave concerns regarding the lack of an equitable education for our secondary students. 
These children will suffer the ramifications of this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
In some instances, this decision may change the course of their adult lives. 
I don't want that to happen to my children 
and I don't want it to happen to anyone else's. 
I implore you to reconsider this plan and attempt to find a way to make the secondary re-entry plan more equitable, so that our chm students can receive 100 of the curriculum that they are entitled to just like our elementary students. 
Thank you. 
That's all 23 board discussions. 
The first one we put on today uh was an adoption of the 20 2021 calendar. 
There was a talk of a change. 
Mr o'keefe 
yeah. 
It's just you know something I want to bring to the board's attention because obviously administration has been meeting with district administrators as well as our teachers looking at the opening of school and just trying to be sure that we can be as prepared as possible for whatever that is. 
Other districts have taken a look at this and also um chosen that option each year 
a district is allowed up to four superintendents conference days. 
Our current calendar has three uh. 
The first two uh are in september the september second, and third days are superintendents conference days um and the third one would be. 
On election day november. 
Third, we've been discussing the possibility of having the board consider the ninth, which is wednesday
, I'm sorry, eighth, which would be the the first day of school for students to be a third superintendent's conference day in september uh. 
That would give staff teachers administrators everything all the time that they need to be sure if there are those last minute, tweaks changes to classroom setups changes to schedules assignments. 
Whatever the case is, you know, I had a lengthy conversation with mr barbara last night. 
You know his guidance. 
Counselors are ready to dive in to do whatever work needs to be done to make our secondary experience as good as possible, but we need the data first. 
So once we have that data we can dive in on this, we don't have much time and time 
is not on our side um. 
So for your consideration, um we'd like to talk about adding the eighth as a superintendent's conference day. 
Would we have to remove another day off the calendar for that we would just convert that date to a super. 
I wouldn't alter the calendar right now other than that. 
Obviously, since the year hasn't even begun, uh it still keeps us within legal limits. 
It still leaves us the flexibility if we were to have a severe winter um. 
You know, maybe with the new reality of our ability to switch between distance learning. 
Maybe that can even help us. 
You know in bad storms and things like that, where we might be able to turn something like that on and not lose instructional time, but I think giving the staff that extra time, especially since we're down to the wire uh you know, could be helpful now on the counter side. 
Obviously, families are already starting to make plans they're ready to send kids back on the 8th they've already made decisions they've arranged child care. 
Whatever the case is so it isn't just as simple as you deciding 
let's re-adopt a calendar, and maybe it's not even something you do tonight. 
Maybe it's something you consider you think about, and maybe it's on the next agenda for the 26th, but I wanted to bring it to your attention to give you some time to think about it and talk about it. 
Um you know. 
Is it a possibility where we could consider that day, uh for additional staff planning? 
Does anybody have a question about the calendar? 
I'm just thinking we're gonna make this decision. 
We have to make it tonight, so parents do have enough time to make arrangements. 
Mr bauman, can you um what kind of professional development day would it look like? 
What would it look like? 
Well, it would be a useful day for the teachers too 
yeah. 
It's not a none. 
I mean miss heinz, can speak better to the professional development days. 
None of them are going to be like the normal professional development days. 
I'm sorry
, I didn't mean professional development superintendent's day. 
Would it be a day that the teachers would be able to kind of get their stuff together? 
Yes, we 
so I mean, as we've been saying, our teachers have been working hard all summer ongoing professional development. 
This is really more honored space for them, so they can continue to clean up. 
Get things ready, make sure the google classrooms all their lessons, are in place. 
So not our traditional. 
You know ad camp style superintendents conference days, but we recognize that it's a tremendous amount of work to get started. 
Does anybody have any other questions? 
Does anybody want to vote on it tonight or did you was the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready? 
It came through a conversation. 
You know, administration and staff have asked for it. 
So I agree with sarah 
the earlier the better I would agree as well. 
We can vote on it right now. 
All right motion to change the calendar to the eighth being a staff development day. 
Second, by miss volpe, all in favor opposed the calendar is done, get that information out to families as quickly as possible. 
The next item up for discussion is future board letter writing. 
This is something that I personally put on. 
I 
I don't think that we should be putting letters out to the community if, with all of our names on it, if we don't agree with what it says, um and I could be in the minority on that- 
but I'm I would be fine with writing a letter, putting spaces underneath and letting those who agree. 
Do it now 
most times it's a nine, nothing 
and there's no issues 
but um. 
You know I personally didn't agree with the letter that got put out and if my name is going to be on it especially admonishing another board member. 
I have to agree with it um 
and that's just the way I personally feel about it. 
I understand that we're a body 
and I get that, but at the end of the day, it's our name and we have to put our head on our pillows 
and if we don't agree with something I want everyone to have the freedom to not only say that but be able to just to live with the decisions that are made and to be able to stand up to the community and say here. 
I did this or I did not do this and have a straight face when you say it
, I 
I 
just I didn't agree 
and it's my fault for you know ever putting my name on that piece of paper. 
So I just I want to put it from here on out. 
If anyone has an issue, please feel free, but if, whatever letter it is, we write the letter, our names are on the bottom and we can sign the letter if we agree with it. 
If we don't, we take the space away and then you don't have to sign it. 
If you don't want to, but at least you can, you can make your own decision and you don't have to feel like you're beholden, because maybe it's only five people who agree with it and five out of the nine agree 
and now, all of a sudden, it's a board decision and your name goes on it, no matter what jim so uh, how do you determine whose name is going on 
suppose four people want the letter out is: 
is that sufficient to send the letter with four names? 
That's uh! 
That's why it's up for discussion, so I did it. 
So it's got to be a majority. 
Take to even have the letter go out, so five members have to support it and then, let's suppose it's a 5-4, the letter does go out board of education and the five members who agree with it sign it. 
That's 
I'm going to see that if anybody had an issue with that, I I just wanted to address it tonight so that we haven't had a chance to get all together in a room. 
So so let me express you on the opposite end of the spectrum. 
If four people want to put a letter out 
and it's a four or five board, the four people be able to put a letter out, 
because the way that, when you sign up for the board of education, you sign up as a group, okay and you vote as a group- 
okay 
and hey, listen, there are things that happened in the past. 
Why? 
I was on the no side of a vote where I got dragged to the mud, but I signed up for that 
yeah. 
You know, so my my impression is that five is a majority and 
and it's what moves resolutions 
and it's what moves you know uh. 
You know uh different different uh incent, you know initiatives and so on and so forth. 
So so I think the easy way to do that is that when you're getting attacked by a community member 
okay, because of what the letter says, your response is look the board. 
The board majority voted on it. 
I don't necessarily agree with it. 
You know, if you have concerns, please contact the rest of the board. 
You know right 
and that's how we leave it. 
Just just my just my personal opinion this 
I happen to disagree only because when we pass, let's just say the new principle for sage of north in the in the minutes
, it will reflect that jim voted. 
No, it's not going to vote that. 
Yes, we voted yes, but 
if you go look in the in the back to it, jim can say I 
I 
I said no 
and he could say anybody to the community and 
here's why I voted no 
and he could put his head on his polo 
and he's fine 
like it will not reflect that. 
I said no and, and 
just like, I think it's wrong- 
that you get dragged through the mud on stuff that you voted no for, and you can't even back it up, because there is no record of you ever saying. 
No, unless you look through certain things on votes 
yeah, 
but if it's a letter, there's no record of anybody saying no, but if the letter's coming from the board of education is it coming from the board of education? 
Is it coming from five board members? 
I mean I
, so I guess my point is: I don't think we should be writing any letter. 
That's admonishing another member 
I mean most most letters are in agreement to the state saying we need our funding to the state saying we don't agree with certain things that they're doing, but we should certainly not be or so um and- 
and maybe, mr black, you can answer this. 
When we get elected to the board of education, my voice means nothing more than anybody sitting out there. 
My voice only means one as part of us nine. 
We 
I have no say I can't decide anything. 
I have no more decision making than my neighbor next door. 
My my only input or influence comes as as a board of nine, so the letters that we had done previously, like supporting our seniors graduating in person or the denouncement of betty devos as the education or denouncing racism that was issued as a board, not as me as an individual. 
So I think legally, 
mr black, if you could just give us some guidance here that, when the board of education of sagem school district issues a letter, I think it has to come from the board. 
If laura slattery, who who lives in wisconsin, wants to send a letter to governor cuomo, then I signed my name: laura slattery, not laura slattery, ch, board of education, trustee and- 
and that's 
I feel that me on this board
, I'm not a republican democrat independent anything. 
I am representing a community of 55 000 registered voters, my personal opinions or anything I feel 
personally does not matter when I'm sitting here with the nine nine of us. 
My only thing that I can do as a board trustee is in as a majority of this board. 
Unless, legally you see something, that's how I feel I was elected by the voters. 
I was elected by my sachim community. 
I 
I feel like I have to represent my sagem community as one of nine, not as laura slattery individual and, of course I don't think, that's being suggested um, 
but um we're a governing body and 
every governing body around the country operates that way. 
You operate as a body, you're elected to be part of this body. 
You make decisions as a as a body. 
There may be differences of opinion, that's part of our democracy. 
That's what makes our country great 
um you'll, be able to express those opinions. 
At the end of the day, you have to make a collective decision, and then you have to abide by the decision that that body makes one possible solution. 
Is that um? 
If you are going to issue a letter 
and there's concerns that um dissenting members vote is not going to be known like it is? 
When we take a public vote, you can take a public vote to send the letter, and then you can adopt that letter as a majority vote. 
Those who dissent are on as a matter of record they're on 
they're on record, if that's the case, 
so so you're saying that no one member is allowed to remove their name from a letter. 
I would say that that's not typical practice that you would see, but is it legal for a member to remove a name um? 
Well, if the, when your letter is going out um, I don't think it typically sets forth all the names. 
I don't know. 
I don't really like to say it. 
Has it printed all your names on the left side, it says, there's a list of all the names and on the bottom, it's the president's name. 
So, on the left side of the letter it has all of our names listed 
yeah. 
But that's 
your that's! 
Your letterhead right 
yeah lists all your names. 
It doesn't indicate whether or not you voted for that letter to go out or not. 
It's you're represented on that letterhead. 
It's an official board of education stationery! 
That's why your name is on there. 
It's not signaling that you voted for that or not, but the recognition is, though, that when you do take a vote or when the board puts out material that that's so so that's a fine
, that's a compromised decision. 
I think that any and all letters should be discussed in public and voted in our public. 
That is a concern that you have that's one way of addressing it. 
Yeah I 
I was just going. 
I was just going to say that that sounds like an excellent idea and that really just goes back to like 
you said about my vote. 
You know is on record and your eight votes are on record for these fine individuals here. 
So that would be the same thing. 
We discuss a letter. 
You know we take a vote on it. 
Yes, if it's a majority vote, the letter will go, but the dissenters are also in the minutes. 
I like it 
and I'm 100 in agreement with that. 
This way, it's a public discussion. 
Anybody can look back, but then we still are issuing a letter based on a majority of the board, but as long as there's a record of who votes yes and who votes? 
No, I'm correct. 
I am 100 fine with that. 
Just one statement and me and laura have gone round and round about this before, but I want to. 
I want to make this point. 
Look we're all elected members to this board as any elected official is. 
If I want to write a letter- 
and I want to sign my letter bill, cogan board trustee sachem
, I'm 100 within my rights- to do that. 
It's a matter of opinion as to whether or not I should do that if I want to get together with four other board members and each one of us want to sign it as board trustees. 
Once again, we are within our rights to do that. 
All right. 
It may be perceived as a bad idea by this board, but there's nothing illegal about it. 
Okay, inside it's not a vote. 
I don't think we're going to take here. 
I just I just wanted to make sure that we discussed it 
and there was at least a public so that all future letter writing is done in public and just also just to add to it. 
It's been customary that at the bottom of the letter, the signature block states, the president's name on behalf of yeah 
just signed the letter sincerely the sachin board of education and not place the president's name on the bottom of the letter. 
Okay, uh, the last item up for discussion is the diversity task force. 
So, as you guys know, I gave you guys all an outline about what just got a little bit closer. 
Sorry, I gave you all the um an outline, probably in the end of july, and I don't know if you all got a chance to look it over 
yeah. 
I shared it with the board again um the other day. 
Sarah. 
So I would just like to like make a motion to put it on to vote tonight on establishing this task force. 
Yeah 
I mean my my only issue is, and I don't have a problem with this diversity task force, but the way community committees are usually done is that we could vote to establish one 
give direction to administration to come back as to what the charge is going to be talk about the charge and then approve it um. 
I I 
I would say that that's that's, probably the route we should go and in the years that have been on the board, we establish construction capital projects, committees and 
you know some are established for one specific job 
and then they they they disappear, and that was for um one of the uh. 
You know construction projects that we did um 
after that we didn't do any for a while. 
So we didn't need that organization, but I would say that we we either vote on it tonight. 
Yes, we want to pursue something like this. 
We understand what the end game is, what we're trying to achieve and then um normally what happened is administration would put together a packet of a pamphlet, that's made available to the community. 
They could download it in a pdf format. 
People would sign up for it submit in the same way they would for a budget advisory committee. 
You know 
or so 
or you know any other thing, so I would just say that we 
we follow that format. 
You know and- 
and you know, we're not adopting exactly what the world no 
but we're establishing a diversity, task force and and charging administration to come back to us with what the charge is going to be. 
I would have no problem with that. 
Any questions everyone all in favor of 
I'm sorry, 
yep uh. 
I read the whole thing like lots of times. 
I think it's great, 
you know we need it here in saturn, all in favor, all right any opposed. 
Mr picariello
, this still uh one visitor that we had called wasn't here at the time. 
Um miss williamson. 
Thank you, miss williamson, I'm sorry! 
I know that it's late, I apologize. 
I was doing yard work 
and I was listening. 
Thank you and I had to come 
so I apologize um. 
This is my first time doing anything like this, so I really don't have anything written out or able to look up anything outside. 
So I'll tell you about myself. 
I have four children, three at hiawatha, two of them with severe nut allergies and one of them with viral induced asthma. 
I didn't, I don't really know. 
Well, let me just go with this. 
My kids are fine, they will be homeschooled and they will be homeschooled. 
Well. 
What about all the other children that aren't as lucky as my kids? 
How come? 
Nobody is talking about them? 
How come what nobody's talking about the children getting hit at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't eating at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't learning or being sexually abused at home? 
Nobody cares about those kids. 
I hear a lot of things, how we're emptying the rooms and there's going to be nothing in there? 
No one's allowed to touch each other, no one's allowed near each other. 
We're not we're teaching our kids to be scared. 
I was scared for a long time. 
I've been hurt. 
I've been scared of allergies and a nut killing. 
My child fear cannot run us. 
We need to stand up for who we are and what we believe in 
and I believe all our children deserve a fair chance at life and we are not giving it to them. 
I think I think that's it. 
Thank you very much. 
I know that you waited a while. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Letter c is board of ed discussion. 
Future agenda items future discussion. 
Items excuse me: does anyone have anything future to talk about covered three tonight? 
We okay, the next meeting. 
I don't know if that's the right date. 
That's today. 
No, the 26th okay is august. 
26Th, we're hoping to still be here at 7, 30 p.m. 
Can I have a motion to move into executive session 
yeah 
now we need a reason. 
Mr block um, we're discussing uh uh we're discussing uh property, yes, property. 
I'm sorry! 
I just lost me. 
First real estate transaction, yes real estate transaction. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins say goodbye, mr bauman. 
All in favor meeting is good. 
Thank you very much. 
Everyone good night be careful. 
Going home, okay.
Thank you very much. 
Um is [Music]
, read the congratulations um, so, okay, 
okay, visitors! 
Well, everyone please rise for the pledge and then remain standing for a moment of silence with liberty and justice for all. 
Thank you [Music] good evening. 
Everyone, as you can see, the board of education is attempting to return to some form of public meeting, which is also compliant within the limits set forth by the governor's executive orders and the guidelines of the cdc and department of health. 
We must limit the number of people permitted to be physically present as a part of 
We compliance with those obligations. 
Perhaps the most important item for We meeting tonight is a public discussion about the reopening plan for september, as it pertains to the reopening plan for september. 
We hope to have answers to most of your questions as part of the presentation, but may also need time for the administration to research, an issue on occasion. 
You can always email the superintendent with the question as well. 
I am also aware that some attendees may wish to speak about matters related to conversations that occurred on social media and the role of the board of education. 
In that regard, if you wish to speak, please be sure to fill out a card and give a card to the district clerk. 
There will be two opportunities for public to speak at our meeting. 
The first is limited to comments relating to agenda items only. 
We will then move through the agenda after We complete the agenda items. 
A second opportunity for public comment about non-agenda items will be provided. 
I ask that all present please be reminded to be respectful of one another. 
The administration and the board of education. 
Also the opportunity for public comment is just that public comment. 
the board of education will not engage in debate or back and forth with the public during the period of public comment in an attempt to provide all who wish to speak an opportunity to do so. 
Our policy limits comments to three minutes. 
There may be people who wish to speak, who have been left outside due to space limitations. 
Please ask security station at the doors for a card and security station will bring security station in to the district clerk again. 
While we respect the community and we always want to provide people with the opportunity to be heard if things devolve into personal insult or invective as the president, I will entertain a motion to adjourn the meeting. 
I thank you all in advance for your cooperation to start tonight's meeting. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe are going to make a presentation about Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe reentry plan. 
Sure miss florio. 
Could you fire up the cameras for us all right 
just give Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe a moment. 
While Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe wait for that and while Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe're doing that, I'd also like to apologize to those from watching from home, because, unfortunately, obviously from that distance you're not really going to be able to see Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe screen. 
So for that Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe're very sorry um. 
You know, unfortunately, the limitations of how many people are in the room you know have Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe been able to move the room to an auditorium. 
Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe certainly would have done that um, but Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe're limited to a total of 50 people or 50 of a room's capacity. 
Whichever number is lower uh, so, unfortunately Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe're at that 50 capacity in the room this evening. 
This document, Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe're going to show tonight again is another evolving document. 
Back on the 31st, Mrs heinz and mr o'keefe placed the district's plan on the website, as required by state law. 
the district's plan on the website had to talk about three different models for return, which the district's plan on the website did since the district's plan on the website was posted on the website. 
You may have seen additional commentary from our governor where our governor has since changed some of the parameters, such as offering additional opportunities for choice for family uh and or for staff. 
So we need to take those things into consideration um. 
So again, this document and the presentation you're going to see this evening is the most accurate as of now, but this evening by far is not completed uh at the conclusion of tonight's meeting in this presentation, you're going to get a copy of this presentation emailed to you through the school messenger system, this evening'll also be up on social media and this evening'll, be up on the website, you're, also going to receive an invitation to participate in a survey regarding choice. 
It's a follow-up to the survey that our sent out last week, where our asked potential preferences, this one's going to need to be more definitive where our actually need to know which families are looking to have families children receive instruction at home versus those that are willing to send children to school uh. 
So without further ado, I'm going to ask miss heinz to start our off. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe. 
So this morning our actually concluded and had our last committee meeting, which culminated in the plan that our're going to be sharing with you tonight 
and, as mr o'keefe said, all of the community members will be receiving at eight o'clock a phone call to this manner 
and um also the plan and the survey for remote learning um. 
I just want to thank all of the folks that were on that committee with our. 
our are made up of several community members unit leaders, staff of all sorts, and it really has been a pleasure to work with everybody. 
Excuse me one second, while I got this on 
okay
, so after a tremendous amount of feedback that our received from our survey from our community and given the lengthy documents that our have given out and the models over the past few months, I can happily say that our are able to offer a full return for our elementary students k-5, as well as a full return for our students with disabilities, our special class, which would be our 15-1 classes, our 12-1 classes and our 8-1 students, and at the secondary level due to size and the fact that, because our will need to reappropriate space at both levels, elementary and secondary, our will have to move forward with a hybrid model for grades six to twelve, and that will be an a b schedule based on alpha and household. 
The reason why our were able to uh offer a full return for our elementary school is because mr o'keefe and myself and our instructional directors and our director for facilities and the building principal began walk-throughs. 
Last week. 
our walked through each and every room in our buildings to space and measure at six feet. 
On the average our are able to fit about 17 students in a class. 
Now again, please know that our have scheduled a full return with our total population, so with any remote instruction that would diminish the amount of students coming into our schools, so our would actually have even more room because of the re appropriation of space our needed about one extra section or one extra grade level k5 at each building generally, so our are going to be utilizing space in our libraries in our arts and our music rooms and other common areas, which our'll talk about a little bit later on remote learning is something that, as you know, Last week, it was confirmed that our will, as districts need to be offering this to our students as well. 
This will be a parent choice and a consent uh tonight at eight o'clock. 
Again, when you receive that plan, there will be a survey in there 
and we ask that only parents who are looking to remotely instruct only parents who are looking to remotely instruct their child child fill out the survey, and it is due. 
It is a fast turnaround by friday. 
We need to be able to staff and schedule the remaining students that We have coming into We schools, remote learning again, that is by a parent's choice with consent and no at this time it is a decision for the entirety of the 2021 school year. 
I say this now because, based on the number of possible staff who may also look for accommodations, that might mean staff members staying home in conjunction with our students, our need to match up to see if our have enough staff members who are going to be able to offer remote instruction or should our have to look towards live streaming. 
If our do not have enough certificated staff that matches up with the number of students, and so therefore our would not have possibly a physical space for students to come back to. 
If that were the case, should, of course, all restrictions be lifted through the governor's office, then our would have to, and hopefully would have a little bit of time in between. 
our would just have to restructure and reschedule to ensure that all students are able to return remote instruction will entail. 
It is not like being in person school 
and It is not distance. 
Learning. 
Distance learning is only going to be offered. 
If, again, our are ordered by the governor's office to remain at home. 
All students and all staff remain at home, and that would be live instruction for two and a half hours on google me that would be k12. 
Remote learning is different. 
This is um, more asynchronous learning with possible, live or streaming teaching happening throughout the day. 
This would also be a schedule that would look a tad different based again on the number of students and how we would need to support everybody, but we just did want to be. 
You know fully upfront and present about that. 
we also know that devices for we 
we are not 
a one-to-one school district. 
we have definitely made some strides and we are in the middle of major infrastructure work that is going on. 
we just did order about a thousand new chromebooks in order to be able to disperse for families that do not have any technology in families that do not have any technology in their home at all home at all, but it would be difficult for we to provide a device for every student in families that do not have any technology in their home at all home 
should families that do not have any technology in their home at all be on remote learning. 
So that would be something that the family would also have to consider. 
Students will be expected to complete all assignments daily and any students, obviously with disabilities on remote learning, would be provided all of Students accommodations as per iep. 
As for Students iep 
okay um, it's important
, I'm sorry
, it's important to just uh also talk about the secondary hybrid model for six to twelve. 
On your a day, let's just say um, you know, for the sake of just explaining it to everybody uh, it would be a combination on on a day. 
You would be in your child would run their traditional regular schedule. 
their would leave with homework and any work that would be on their google classroom for the next day that their are home, while the teacher is then teaching the other second half of the class on b. 
Obviously, our teachers are committed folks and our teachers would be checking in answering any questions uh within that 24-hour period, but we would expect that at the secondary level, again, kids will be making sure that all of kids assignments are completed and kids are, and kids are present. 
Attendance is important as we move forward in this school year. 
Okay, now that we shared with you a model of how we're looking to return we students, I think it's very important that all families and community members now we staff knows about the health and safety measures that we are putting in place, and we continue to look to put more in place as as time goes on, masks will be required for all staff and students, both in school and on the bus. 
Remember that the bus is an extension of school, any students are having any difficulty wearing a mask for medical reasons or because of a disability will need to submit documentation. 
As always, always would affirm this with always building principle or through the office of student services. 
Mass breaks will be provided because remember in our classrooms. 
our desks are six feet apart and in the regulations. 
Children do not have to wear a mask during instruction. 
our would encourage, of course, that masks be worn at all times, but that does give our the opportunity to give multiple mass breaks whenever a child does need it, while they're being instructed masks are to be worn, though, however, in the hallways cafeterias, if they're not eating recess any other common area that our would just want to be safe, um, our also every day um. 
Oh I'm, sorry excuse me. 
Uh bus travel will also include, as I said, before, social distancing practices optimally. 
our will be looking for six feet spacing and encouraging family members to sit together. 
Every day, parents and staff will be expected to fill out an online health screening survey and in this presentation, when you do receive an online health screening survey, you will see a hyperlink in there that you can see a sample of what it looks like ahead of time. 
our are also. 
our also took time to ensure that at arrival and dismissal, varied entrances in all of our buildings will be sanctioned off to separate grade levels. 
If they come off of the bus, our are also looking to uh take off the grade levels at increments of time off the bus. 
So everybody is not coming out at the same time so again, just looking to work ways to have plenty of flow while classmans may not look typical, especially at the younger levels. 
You may not see some of the rugs and some of the the other items, the kitchen items, things like that that you would normally see. 
Please know that our classrooms will be warm and inviting like our classrooms always are, because our classrooms teachers will be there. 
their teachers principals will be there and our will still be able to decorate our classrooms. 
our will just not be able to decorate our classrooms with things that kids will be touching, because our classrooms would need to be sanitized every day. 
our classrooms will be devoid, as I said before, of any of those items that may collect germs. 
our are in the process right now, of setting up opportunities for our teachers to continue to clean out our teachers our teachers own personal items, and our are also moving out any unwanted furniture that our don't need in the room so that our can maximize the space hallways and other common spaces are being marked appropriately to ensure social, distancing, so markings on the floor items around on the walls and that's also shared later on in our presentation. 
So you will be able to see it at home as well. 
When you open up the link hand, sanitizer stations are located throughout each building, all along the hallways. 
our will also be having all along the hallways at the elementary level or any other area for gym cafeteria time when, at the secondary level, all along the hallways're able to go out so as children go in and out, all along the hallways can use a hand sanitizer as all along the hallways come into school. 
All of those uh. 
You know, welcoming areas would have a hand sanitizer station as well and at the elementary level. 
our would expect that the students, because our do have sinks in every room they would be washing they hands before and after snack and before and after lunch. 
Okay, so continued on. 
As I said earlier, our have reappropriated spaces at the elementary level and our are in the process of doing the same walkthroughs. 
Now in the secondary buildings. 
We know it's going to be very difficult, especially for the cafeterias to be utilized the way that the cafeterias typically are, because children cannot sit in those tables together. 
So moving in some desks, uh looking at classroom use all of those different types of things, but really at the elementary level. 
our will be using again if our're going on full return for all students. 
Right now in elementary school, our would be looking to utilize our music space, our art space, and so therefore, those special areas become pushing for our students. 
our have worked with those departments and our'll continue to work to make sure that those departments have everything that those departments need for those departments lessons and equipment. 
Cleaning of all buildings will occur daily in the evenings in each classroom. 
our will also provide hand, sanitizer, wipes, gloves and any sort of spray bottles and wipe offs for for our staff and or students who feel encouraged to clean in between applicable filters have also been changed in our classroom events uh. 
our will also look to open up our windows and our doors where our can. 
Obviously you know the reverse was safety making sure that your doors were always locked. 
Your windows were always closed. 
Now, our're being encouraged by the department of health to please use fresh air when possible. 
So our will look to do that prior to it becoming too chilly up. 
Isolation areas have been identified in our buildings, and so, if a child uh is a child has any sort of of symptoms or they come to school 
and they have not filled out the health screening. 
they would be placed there so that we can offer a temperature check and make sure that everything looks okay before we send they down to 
they classroom hygiene protocol visuals will exist in all buildings if they're not there. 
Already and again I share those with you at the end of our presentation so that you can see those. 
our will also be having routine hygiene drills much in the same of how our have regular school building drills at this time. 
Unfortunately, no visitors will be permitted in our schools. 
our just cannot provide enough secure measures for our staff and our students, and so again our will be limiting all visitors. 
Both traditional fire and hygiene. 
Drills will be conducted elementary snack and lunch will be in the classroom to minimize flow and secondary lunch. 
It may be in the cafeteria and alternately in the classrooms. 
our will also rotate any outdoor areas so for recess any of those other matters classes will be rotated on the game field, the basketball court, let's say, for example, and in our playgrounds students, are encouraged to bring our playgrounds students own water bottles. 
our do have bottle filling stations in all of our buildingsour buildings. 
our water fountains, unfortunately, will have to be closed at this time. 
Okay, so just some additional elementary return details that our wanted to share with you. 
You know it's always tough to start with health and safety, because again our don't want it to sound, like our students are returning to jail, but our do want to make sure that our students and our staff feel safe for the return. 
But please know that, on top of everything that our are doing, the social emotional well-being of our students is of the utmost importance to our, as well as of our staff, and our have surveyed students and our are looking to survey further the rest of our staff to just find out what are some of those underlying issues or concerns that people have. 
So our can ensure that our have our mental health staff there for supports. 
Unfortunately, our our will have to stress that students may not share materials. 
At this time, students will be assigned students own independent, math, workbooks and guided reading baggies will be provided weekly so that we have time to interchange students out clean students up and leave students for the weekend, so that uh there's a two to three day lag before the children pick up a new baggie and in those items we will integrate. 
As always in our literacy and our math, our science and social studies, topics whenever possible, this will be in addition to the strong direct instruction that our classroom teachers provide. 
Already all all students will be benchmarked for all all students ela and all all students math to identify all all students present learning levels. 
Curriculum will be retard as needed. 
We definitely know that this will need to occur for math, and We have provided some slides in the past that show you that We're fortunate 
We created 
We own math curriculum here a couple of years back 
and we know uh the the one to two units that each grade level will probably need to go back to 
so that, if I'm coming into second grade, I'm certainly not going to be able to start on my second grade. 
Math curriculum 
I'll need to be re-taught, some of the materials from when I was in first grade and for literacy. 
Once the teacher knows the collective levels of what they have in they room, they will be able to accommodate those literacy. 
Lessons around that art and music will be a push in again to minimize the flow, and we are currently working with we art, music departments. 
This is one that was a really tough hit. 
Music has to be 12 feet. 
Apart for any coral or any sort of wind instruments, we are working we hardest with the department of health. 
we are very fortunate here. 
we have a very strong music program 
and we do not want to see that diminish, and so we are looking for ways to think out of the box in order to be able to offer course opportunities that might be in smaller sections and different ways to offer lessons as well, but we have provided and are keeping all lesson areas in the elementary schools, so that students can still maintain lessons as needed. 
Physical education will be a mix of separating two classes. 
Typically, that are adjoined, so one class will be in the gym. 
One class will be outside and inclement weather 
One class will rotate between the gym and in the classroom. 
Um, mr butel and miss mcentee have reworked butel and miss mcentee curriculum to ensure that all team sports will be done in the spring, so all of those units will be taught in the spring and in the beginning it will be more personal. 
Fitness. 
Traditional grading will also return for our students. 
While we know that there may be some interruption in terms of what model we students may have to face, where we hear rumors that we may have to go to distance learning sometime later in the fall. 
we fully believe that by using google classroom no matter what we will be able to make that seamless transition to distance learning should we need- 
and we are well prepared, as opposed to when the crisis first happened, and most school districts were really just grasping at straws, but we also know that the accountability is something that is very important to we students very important to we community and especially to our students who are at the high school level. 
As I said before, google classroom will be utilized for communication at both the building principle and classroom teacher level. 
we really want to make sure that parents are on one medium so that parents can see any communication, email messages, lessons etc, and at this time we are going to enforce, to ensure for the safety of we staff and other students that any sort of instruction that is done on google classroom or virtually that our students adhere to our district code of conduct. 
When students this year sign on families sign on to look at schedules, families will be asked and prompted to sign off on certain measures around this 
okay. 
I just wanted to share with you some of our pictures that john and I took as our went around in our walkthroughs. 
These are some samples of our our elementary classrooms. 
Again, These're, not decorated, yet, of course, but you can see that These have removed a lot of the traditional. 
You know, wonderful items that These would see in a classroom, but again These really wanted to maximize space and ensure that the teacher had space in the front of where their smart boards are and then also making sure that kids had room and were not. 
You know pushed up too too much, so These still are adjusting that once every single classroom is created at the building level, These will be returning mr o'keefe 
and I, with These team, to just ensure that everybody has space both the teacher in the front of room and then students around. 
So again, These are fortunate here. 
These do believe that These have enough staff to move forward and should the numbers for remote learning ensure even more flexibility. 
These may be able to open up more sections in These elementary schools and at These secondary levels, bringing back more secondary students uh. 
This is at one more of the elementary school and to the right there. 
You will see a classroom um at the secondary level. 
Um. 
This particular sample is where These marked This particular sample the a and b desks, so that students will be sitting and then This particular sample will make This particular sample a little bit easier for cleaning at night for our custodial staff. 
Okay. 
This is this is also a little bit of a tough share here, 
because I know that we've been getting a lot of questions about child care and upk. 
First, child care: we are still going to be providing am npm child care by boce by scope, educational services. 
child care continue to offer right now child care throughout the pandemic for our essential workers, and child care are happy to move forward to offer this services for all of our students. 
At this point, though, our are on hold for our upk program, and that is not because our don't have the space or our don't want to, but our simply have not received the allocations yet from the state, and that is how our are able to run our upk program. 
While our do have many students who do a tuition based into our upk program, it is simply not enough to substantiate our upk program. 
Should our not get the allocations, so our are advising parents at this time. 
I know I've. 
I've answered many phone calls many emails 
if you are need, if you need care, if you would like your child to go to an alternate preschool now is the time to seek that out just to be safe. 
However, if our were to find out about the allocations tomorrow, our would also be able to implement that uh. 
You know moving forward, so our have not changed anything 
our're not changing any spaces at this time, 
um our're just kind of on a standstill but to be safe. 
our just encourage you to look just in case. 
Excuse me, ms hines, 
yes 
yeah. 
Actually, since our last spoke earlier today, I spoke to mr duffy uh, 
mr duffy's the executive director of scope and runs our upk program just trying to see if mr duffy's heard anything further about our upk program 
uh and mr duffy has not heard much more than our have. 
As a matter of fact, there was a meeting earlier in the day with the suffolk county, superintendents uh, as well as mr wix who's, the regional superintendent for eastern suffolk boces, to see what boces knew about upk funding and 
again their contacts in albany have been very, very quiet on upk funding. 
The only information their've received is, you know, floating a balloon from albany that their're considering opening upk up, but their may only fund upk funding at 80 percent of what the grant would be. 
So that would mean if the district wanted to move forward. 
That would be an expense that was not budgeted for and our'd have to make a determination. 
You know to take those monies from elsewhere to support our upk program, so it sounds like those monies're getting closer to a final decision um, 
but I'd have to keep the border prize, so the border prize might be a model in which our'd have to support 20 of our upk program to make the border prize move forward. 
So I'll keep you posted on that. 
Thank you, mr o'keefe, um, okay 
and then on to now our upk program. 
So those are our students because our do have two. 
our have cte programs that our house our. 
cte programs that we house ourselves will still remain on the a b schedule, but the but the bose cte programs, where students get on the bus and go to Boces. 
Boces did alert our last week that cte programs that we house ourselves will be providing that in uh house cte programs that we house ourselves do have the room so that will be live every day and for those students our will still have busing from our high schools to and from our upk program. 
our at this time, though, say that our may need family support in terms of if your child might need a ride to school if cte programs that we house ourselves are going to our upk program in the afternoon or alternately. 
That is, that is not solidified. 
mr o'keefe and mr savone are looking at that through transportation to see if Mr o'keefe and mr savone might be able to accommodate and pick up individual students at Mr o'keefe and mr savone homes. 
That would only be for those choosing remote learning right. 
Only those choosing remotely. 
Thank you, okay, uh. 
So here I just. 
I share the hyperlinks that you will see on um on the presentation that that our've sent home uh for the sake of time, I'm not going to go through all of these links, but the top is a sample of our health screening form and the bottom of our all the protocol visuals a sample of these links that we have smattered around every single building and so for we next steps. 
As we said this morning, we finished we planning committee meeting where we laid out the the final steps here with we district leaders and we volunteers. 
we board of education, pres presentation is, is now as you can see, and then we also have a live community forum on monday at seven o'clock and we will be uh live streaming pres presentation. 
Similarly here, however, I would envision that we would be a little closer that so that you can see we a little bit more clear um, but on friday we will be sending out a survey just asking community members for questions that community members have. 
we will collate those into subject areas and we will look to we best answer. 
Any questions that you have as well as we building administration will be delivering a common q, a sort of like fact sheet about further details pertaining to to the buildings, and this will include sample schedules for all of our students- orientations how those will go out for our grade six on our grade nine. 
Some of that will be virtual and some of that will still be activities just broken up into smaller increments at the building, as well as arrival and dismissal times and bell schedules for secondary students and then, lastly, as governor cuomo had ordered on friday, we are in the process of updating we district website for protocols for any symptomatic individuals testing. 
we are not responsible per se for testing we, but we are responsible for offering a plan. 
Should a student or a staff member go home, a student or a staff member are required to go, get testing where that could occur, and then, of course, a student or a staff member can't come back into school until testing results have been provided and 
then contact tracing as well. 
Okay. 
So that is the end of we presentation this evening. 
we look forward to speaking and sharing some more and clarifying more for you, as the rest of the night goes on and then on monday, as well at seven o'clock. 
Did I oh my apologies. 
Let me go back. 
I 
I didn't realize that I think I got caught up in what we were saying about upk before um, my apologies. 
These are some additional details about we secondary return and again uh, with the utmost priority being the social and emotional well-being of we students. 
In grades. 
Six to eight we will be benchmarking for eli. 
we do that through a literacy management system that we have and also for math. 
All of we math departments have benchmarking type assessments that All of our math departments do in the beginning of the year and again this will be to identify present learning levels in grades, seven to 12 curriculum adjustments may be made for applicable areas where prior learning needs to be had so, for example, in our math and our science classes, there may need to be some learning from the prior year's regents bearing class, and so we would be looking to look at curriculum around that and possibly offer review classes for we students as well again, traditional grading will return. 
Students may not share, so we will be limiting textbook use 
and we'll be taking advantage of all of the online subscriptions that we have physical education again. 
Very much like elementary school will be a mix of the gym outside fields and other large area use instrumental lessons very similar to elementary. 
we are working with that department to ensure that lessons will occur. 
that department do need to be 12 feet if that department are wind and or choral in nature, and again we will be looking to figure out ways in order to still offer those choral groups, but in a modified version google classroom will continue to be utilized for communication with both the principal and the classroom teacher again for a seamless transition should we ever be ordered into distance learning. 
Lockers will mostly be used for am and pickup only that's not to say that if a student really needed to go back, we would not allow a student really needed to go back to, but again just trying to minimize the flow and minimize how much we students are putting into the lockers. 
So we would envision some form of outerwear, that's appropriate for that time and uh modified or or very um. 
You know slight binders and or folders notebooks 
that slight binders and or folders need um stagger grades again in times of at the end of the period. 
we would be announcing uh grades so that grades can come out into the hallways, so that would mean that we would be um at the end of the period starting it a little bit earlier, so that we can allow each grade level to disperse into the hallway to grades next period. 
Okay, sorry about that um. 
So that still is the end of we presentation um. 
we hope that this did clarify some further information for you. 
we are appreciative of the support and the time that the community offered we to be able to digest everything and wait for the orders, so we can bring this to you tonight. 
Thank you. 
Questions from the board questions from the board. 
Is anybody, jim, a john on the upk uh right now? 
The way that's funded is uh. 
Correct me. 
If I'm wrong, like a six hundred thousand dollar grant, primarily we get a six hundred thousand dollar grant. 
we hold a lottery that allots 252 families a spot in our upk program we have more interest than that annually, but families beyond the 253 are able to participate for the same rate, which is about twenty four hundred dollars per family for the year 
okay. 
So if, if governor cuomo uh would give we 80 percent of that, that would mean that the district would have to come up with a hundred and twenty thousand dollars correct. 
But are you in that hundred twenty thousand dollars? 
Are we counting that that the lottery people are not paying tuition? 
That would still be the lottery people not paying right, so, in other words, the 120 000 could be reduced if the lottery people were willing to pay a tuition fee. 
Yes, that was a model the board chose to go with. 
Yes, okay, thank you just to figure back on what security was saying if they were to um to to uh. 
Take twenty percent of that uh we'd be looking at about 479 thousand. 
Two hundred is what we'll be looking at, which is what accommodate 201 kids. 
You were saying that you were concerned that we, we might not be able to raise the funds to be able to. 
You know, manage our upk program and have enough you know 
what 
yeah 
I mean. 
You'd have to redo the lottery. 
Then I I wouldn't I don't know. 
If would necessity, would you want to use the same number then cut the same number off? 
Well, I set off at just 201 and then and then open the same number up at 237.69 per per family per month. 
we could examine any model that the board wanted to take a look at 
yeah. 
Certainly those other families had already been notified that those other families were among the families chosen for the free program. 
That's the worst. 
The worst case scenario would be correct, but let's say those other families take all the funding and, and those other families don't and one of the concerns to have all the funding I mean 
have we thought about reaching out to some of we state elected officials, flanagan or uh doug smith, to find out if flanagan or uh doug smith can get we clarification from governor cuomo's office as to whether or not governor cuomo's going to fight 
yeah
, we can certainly continue to reach out. 
Quite honestly, during much of this crisis, much of much of this crisis have been rather silent. 
we haven't been able to get a lot of information. 
governor cuomo isn't sharing much with other people other than when governor cuomo decides to put it out via press conference, I mean. 
Normally, our local representatives are very helpful in getting information for our local representatives. 
Unfortunately, hadn't been able to get information for our local representatives, but it's certainly worth trying. 
I mean our local representatives're two weeks before the start of school and you've got 252 families, not knowing whether or not 252 families have a pre-k 
yeah. 
I mean 
I don't know
, you know how the board feels, but I personally think that you would get 252 families, even if you would get 252 families took all 599 000, because at 237 a month for half day pre-k, it's still a great great opportunity 
sure- 
and I can't and 
now more than ever and and would be willing to work with our local representatives if there was zero funding and our local representatives had enough participation to still run our upk program. 
Yes would can our local representatives include something like that in the survey sits some of the families out there to see what the interests would be. 
our local representatives could do a separate survey. 
I wouldn't want to you know not on the same survey. 
Yeah put it out as a separate survey, specifically targeted to those families that are already in the process. 
I have a follow-up to that. 
Where are we putting all these students if we classes are maxed out at this time we still have not reappropriated our classes. 
we do have a couple of buildings because of additional special education sections that we needed, that we moved the classes, but we have not taken away those class spaces. 
Yet so, if we were to go with the will of the board to you know, put out a survey and go with a tuition base, we would be you know all set to go: 
hi hi uh. 
I just had a quick question um about the bus and 
what is the busing going to look like 
I mean again, it'll also depend on participation. 
You know we put out a survey to the parents uh a week or so ago. 
I think we had nine thousand respondents in in very brief order. 
Um in a survey about a third of the families uh considered, possibly keeping nine thousand respondents children home um of the two-thirds willing to send their children children in 65 of those said their children would use the bus. 
The other 35 said their children would drive their children children to school um. 
So just some quick, math 
you're only looking at say, 4 500, kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers. 
I mean kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers could change 
when kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers put out the new survey um, and it could be that you know parents first stop that kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers don't want to use the bus and 
then during the year. 
Maybe kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers start. 
You know kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers need the bus um. 
So kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers're not reducing the number of bus runs. 
All the runs that have been budgeted for would be running um, but with those numbers you'd end up literally with just about one child per seat. 
You know so 
and then you also take into account remote 
yeah 
you'll get routed for 44 students. 
So in the worst case scenario there could be two pupils in each seat, but based on the information kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers're receiving, I don't think there'll be that participation. 
Okay, just um some clarification so with the custodial staff cleaning each night, so 
the custodial staff're going to have more to do than the custodial staff did prior. 
Have kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers increased the custodial staff since the custodial staff job description will be different to do a more deeper cleaning every day daily versus 
yeah. 
Unfortunately, that was one of the items that was pulled back on the budget, 
so obviously kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers may need to take a look at that again kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers were rating 10 custodians uh 
and then, when there was issues where kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers even today, kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers still don't know what kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers state funding is um and 
kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers still have the potential of a looming. 
20 percent cut um, 
kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers decided um. 
If you remember back to january and february, kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers were talking about this. 
kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers were adding one extra custodian, each building 
right um. 
That was one of kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers enhancements for this year's budget. 
kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers did draw that back um, so kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers're going to work with the custodial staff. 
kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers have work with the substitute staff kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers 
have, and you know man it as best as possible to optimize cleaning, 
okay 
and then um with the uh secondary schools, where you have the a b desks next to each other. 
So that means, if I am an a student 
and I sit in only the a 
and then the next day, the b desk comes in. 
That image might change, though I was going to say that that was really more so that kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers can show a visual to the families, how kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers were spacing it out in the beginning, those desks kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers 
would see needing to be reappropriated and put into kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers lunchrooms different other areas where kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers're going to need to reappropriate other space, the library different items like that um. 
So I don't. 
I don't necessarily think kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers were just at north today and in the classrooms that kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers walked around in with miss trombetta. 
There was only about 15 to 16 desks in in each classroom: 
okay 
yeah. 
That was an initial setup 
when kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers were trying to figure out what it would look like or how kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers could divide them up. 
But in fact, with the style of cafeteria tables, we have it. 
it really prohibits the number of children that can eat in the cafeteria. 
kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers believe kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers're going to take all the cafeteria tables out of those secondary cafeterias and store all the cafeteria tables and put in desks. 
I mean it's not going to be the most attractive. 
Lunchroom it'll be set up more like a testing room where children will be spaced six feet apart right with classroom desks correct, but kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers do anticipate that kids interested in using the bus based on those numbers would be able to offer breaks, for you know
, students to be able to go outside and go into any of the recreation areas, items like that elimination 
and 
so then um in the secondary schools. 
If the kids are um changing classrooms um will the b desk get wiped down between each change or how does that work in the cafeteria? 
Yes, yes, okay, not in the classrooms that would that would technically be not possible. 
I mean there's 3 000 desks in high school and 1600 or so in in a middle school. 
That just wouldn't be the means in that four or five minutes of passing to wipe down all the cafeteria tables. 
But if we student would want to do we student own destiny, the materials will be in the classroom right. 
We are providing that for every classroom. 
Okay and then one last question. 
Sorry, everybody! 
It's okay! 
If a staff or a student happens to test positive, that would then be reported, and then the cdc would guide We on what We had to do like 
or We have We own plan. 
How does that work? 
The department of health, the department of health department of health? 
So The department of health, the department of health department of health would tell We like so if it's one student in one classroom 
right that may be different than a student in a middle school who passes through a hall or mrs clayton's, become an expert on the matter. 
Okay, so the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require us to make reports for certain things and the department of health and and the new york state and the federal requirements require the medical treatment provider. 
The doctor who's performed the diagnosis for a positive result to report information to reporting for contact tracing. 
So therefore, We obligation we go above and beyond to make sure that, even if, for some reason, the medical treatment provider has not contacted the contact tracing, we will just check you know belt and suspenders that we have provided some insight in case there's an instance. 
The other thing is when the lab results come back. 
the lab results are um supposed to be also provided to the contact tracing, at which point the department of health would be uh or enter 
cdc would be contacting tracers and determining who cdc would contact, including students or staff or family or whoever cdc came into contact with. 
Can I can I pick you back on that question quick? 
Yes, thank you very much so on the checklist that we do daily. 
Let's just say rob 
and I are in a classroom 
and I find out that he test positive for covid the next day when my parents are filling out the check sheet 
and it says, have you come in contact with anybody? 
That's tested positive? 
Will that prevent my entrance into the building? 
If you're saying you tested positive 
yeah, 
if you're saying you're tested right? 
No, I mean, like I'm, not gonna, tell you that rob testifies we're not allowed to tell you 
I mean I came to learn it. 
it becomes common knowledge of who it was 
yeah, 
and now I have to honestly fill out the sheet 
yeah 
I mean I'm have to now have to say. 
Yes, I did come into contact with some of the department of health guidelines for close contact, and this is where it gets a little squirrelly because you know, are we in close contact? 
Are we in close contact? 
Their criteria for close contact is less than six feet for 15 minutes or more um, so we'll have to look at each of those one at a time, and I can foresee the department of health as soon as schools open, you know, becoming overwhelmed with calls from districts all around the state um just trying to get feedback and answers, so we're building criteria and protocols with we nursing staff with we personnel staff. 
You know, so we can make some of these decisions on we own. 
we have handled situations already, even during summer school programs. 
So it's not that we're unfamiliar with how to do it. 
we've had staff members with with covid um, 
so it's just going to be on a bigger scale. 
Now, that's all, and also just to mention
, mr block is with we this evening from ingram and smith. 
He has been we one of we main contacts that we've been triaging information between the state, the federal, what we have in we schools, what we can do and what we can't do and trying to find the best scenario for we students and we staff 
and we'll continue to do so, and I promise this is my last question. 
So if a parent chooses the remote learning, yes, a parent have to commit to that for the year. 
a parent can't change a parent mind like after the first marking period, a parent're committing to that 
and then a parent student um cannot participate in, let's say spring sports, no, 
so um, I think in in the beginning of the guidance, it said that students may not be able to may not be able to um enter into activities or sports. 
We know now that that is not the case and that if a child is remote, they're still a student of ours, We're not really going to have any activities. 
So We don't foresee that being an issue. 
So it's really more for sports, but miss trombetta who sits on uh. 
The community. 
Four section has shared with us um information in terms of how they're looking at that language and how us would not be prohibited most likely from keeping children back from sports in september, and then the child plays a spring sport and then come the spring. 
Sports are up and running 
and you tell the child Sports can't play, and please just know that when Sports write that Sports're looking to make it more of a commitment that could be up to a year. 
That is because Sports don't want to give the misnomer that if a child says well, I want you know a family to say that a family want to be remote in a week 
and then a family change a family mind. 
a family want to do it another week. 
We will look at each case, but it would be very challenging for We to bring back large numbers of students who think who feel a family might have made a poor choice, because that would shift all of We classrooms and all of We teaching staff. 
No, I would totally agree with that. 
I just didn't know if it would be like after every marking period reevaluated, but if the parent does commit, I just don't want to hurt the student of course by saying. 
If um extracurricular comes back in spring, the parent made this choice in september, and now you can't participate right and- 
and I think for We, you know being just uh of 
mine- that things could shift very easily. 
We could look to look at that 
come january 
and it may not need to be a year-long commitment, but We did want to write it down so that parents were aware all right. 
Thank you very much. 
Thank you for sharing this with We 
yeah. 
I have two questions or concerns um. 
When our own plan was developed to return to school k through five the ada b day, our own plan wasn't based on surveys that went out as to the number of parents that think parents would choose remote or not choose remote. 
our own plan was based on our entire population. 
Yes, so conceivably, if our have a um, a 6 through 12 model of a day b day, hypothetically every parent said, I want my kids to return to school. 
every parent can. 
every parent can accommodate all of my kids in an ajb day. 
You mean physically back into school. 
No, every parent wouldn't be able to do that. 
How would every parent physically bring them all back? 
every parent don't have so at the elementary level, just very simple, math right. 
every parent have to take out about five to six, seven kids out of each classroom in order to be able to accommodate that average size. 
My question a little bit on the six through twelve model- 
uh-huh
, okay, it that was based upon returning every single child to school. 
So if friday, the survey is if we have if we have more children now 
I understand you. 
Thank you. 
So if we have more children who are going to be on remote, we could 
conceivably- 
and I know we discussed this this morning in we 
committee- 
we could look to bring back more uh students. 
My question is that my concern is the same as laura is having a one-year commitment. 
I received a half a dozen phone calls today, um, probably in the last couple hours 
about I'm concerned about the one-year commitment we know. 
Okay, that you know in remote learning it says remote instruction is not equivalent to in-person hybrid instruction 
right, so it's not the same level 
right so for forcing kids out of school. 
What we're doing is we're creating a bigger educational gap for the following year. 
Well, we're not forcing that would be a parent's choice, but the thing is we allow a parent to come back after each quarter. 
Okay, if we're able to accommodate a parent according to the way our own plan was designed. 
Why wouldn't we allow a parent come back after after one quarter, so a parent can get that? 
I didn't think we said that we wouldn't be allowing we said that it would be really prohibitive for we to be able to reschedule a parent back into classrooms, but we could look at it based on the numbers that we have. 
we wanted to be honest, mr scavo, and let families know that this could be a year-long commitment, and most districts are looking at that at either january or the year long, because it is very disruptive that would mean having to up just move around the entire schedule for um. 
You know our schools, which our may still have to do, should covert restrictions be lifted, but you wouldn't want to recant, and our know that that happened quite a bit where, in the beginning of all this debacle, our were putting out information and 
then something you know, alternatively, was shared, but I think our just said before with miss slattery, that, of course, if our could look at it by quarter and our felt like it wasn't going to be a tremendous feat for our families that our would do that. 
But I think that that's not probably what a parent is going to make a parent choice on if I'm choosing to be remote. 
It's because I'm thinking that it's unsafe for my child to be at school. 
So I'm hoping that by these presentation, slides that we have 
people will see that we've made tremendous tremendous um. 
You know strides in making sure that our schools are safe, our schools're, clean 
and we're doing routine protocols to ensure that, but the one-year commitment we know is a year. 
That's what this time for right! 
Now! 
Yes, so if something changes at home uh a person, that's furloughed now has to go back to work right
, our schools want to and our schools our schools impression is going to be that our schools can't return because our schools signed the paper saying that our schools have a one-year commitment to be at 
yeah. 
But I mean I think, though um if, if there's something along those lines- 
and we all get those calls all the time, 
if there's a family, that really is in enough need and feels like there's a family made the poor choice or not a poor choice. 
there's a family made the wrong choice for what there's a family 
there's a family thing is. 
Going on right now, so whether a parent goes back, furloughed or there's a family child is just not doing well in remote learning and 
there's a family were to contact us just like any other parent phone call that us would have. 
Of course, us would look at every case individually, but I'm talking as a whole. 
us could not say you're going to be a remote 
and then, if you choose to decide in masses that you want to come back, us just would not be able to run the same schedule 
and then us would be restarting everything over again. 
The reason why I bring this up is: I watched the the newsday webinar yesterday 
uh us had dr johnson. 
I finally heard all about dr johnson. 
I got a chance to see dr johnson in the presentation, along with a psychiatrist along with a the superintendent of north babylon, and that exact question came up right and a lot of the experts were saying. 
I would not go past a semester. 
In fact, a lot of districts are going quarterly, 
you know- 
and I just don't. 
I just don't want to influence a person's decision because a lot of districts're fearful that, if a lot of districts sign the paper a lot of districts're not going to be able to come back because the reality of the paper is, is that you know when we look at the education of even a day b day. 
My concern is that, as a teacher, you can't teach the entire curriculum and now we're talking about prior learning 
being re-taught from the previous year, how you and you're never going to be able to teach the the entire curriculum, but the kids that at home that are not getting the same. 
Equivalency of education are going to be further behind the following year and which all we're going to do is create a a snowball effect 
and that's My concern. 
I mean 
you know I personally would like you know the opportunity that, if they, if they come back after, if they're the first quarter, which is a 10-week period or nine-week period
, I think it would be a little more settling for the people in the community um. 
Knowing that all right, this remote's not learning I committed to a year now, I'm stuck well
, I mean, I think I think two things right, because I agree with you. 
I don't think anybody wants to be in the position where we can't welcome back students interchangeably as students need, and we definitely know that, no matter what happens. 
Curriculum is going to be interrupted this year. 
That is a safe bet right, but if we play, if it's the will of the board, if it's the will of the board to change that- 
and you would like to make that language more flexible, we're happy to do that. 
But please know that we've taken, you know quite a concealed amount of time to making sure we would prefer we students not to be on remote, but if a family really chooses and needs to choose that we honor and we respect that absolutely um. 
But yes, I mean nobody wants to do that, but nobody's the size of sagem either, and so we have different restrictions. 
That's why the question was the plan design based on the entire 
um it was. 
it was based on of if all students were going to be a full return, then we would have to go in an a b day if we are finding, though, that we have remote students at a quantity where we can bring back students even an additional day or or by grade level seniors. 
First, ninth graders. 
First, you know. 
However, we look to plan through that. 
Then that's would be we next step. 
So just like what we were saying earlier in we remote instruction um, it's going to be hard to match up what exactly the model will look like until we have the survey results from we teachers and for we families, so we can match it up 
certification-wise. 
My biggest concern is we have kids taking ap exams and getting kids ready for that and getting kids ready for the next level college 
yeah. 
You know we. 
we have training as much face time with with staff. 
It's absolutely. 
I agree with you 
and I'm very 
I'm very thankful uh. 
You know working with the scta if we ever have to think about distance learning the fact that we'll be providing two and a half hours every day for we students so running the same schedule, just shortened periods. 
You know working on google classroom interchangeably now and consistently across all of our classrooms. 
You know just right now. 
Currently we have a tremendous amount of teachers that are undergoing pd, virtually to ensure that everything is is up and running and that teachers that are undergoing pd feel clarified and supported in that kind of work, but you're preaching to the choir. 
I couldn't agree with you more that this is a really challenging time. 
I have a high schooler myself 
and she's in a smaller district, doing an a b schedule um. 
So I scratch my head a lot right now, 
so I 
I completely respect and understand 
and if the board would like us to look at the year-long date, please just let us know and us'd be happy to accommodate. 
No, this this will go the uh, remote learning actually just went out. 
That survey just went out, but us can 
I mean I could send That survey on on. 
On remind in five minutes, if us wanted to say you know that us've changed the date um, but it sounds like. 
Maybe that needs to be more of a discussion if us're looking to go that route meredith engine and then jimmy so on the remote learning. 
If a parent were to choose that model um, I understand that us would want a parent to commit for the full year, because us are devoting staff just to that remote learning 
right us're not using a teacher who may be inside the classroom
, sometimes us're going to utilize the staff that, for whatever reason, has to be staying at home to be our remote teachers. 
That's the optimal plan right, so at the elementary level um, the elementary level works a little bit easier in that in that fashion. 
If I'm an elementary teacher 
and I'm out
, I can conceivably teach any of those grade levels if I'm a librarian, 
obviously that certification, et cetera et cetera
, it gets a little trickier at the secondary level, because if I'm a chemistry, teacher and 
and I'm out- 
and maybe I don't have as many students out for chemistry- 
you know- then what am I giving to that teacher in terms of work that as many students would be doing for that day. 
So one could say that that teacher would switch what as many students're doing and 
now as many students're going to teach more science electives and as many students can support any of those students who are out needing science electives. 
So it's really going to boil down to looking at the hard numbers of students matched up with the teachers that we have. 
Should we not be able to match everybody up which 
I'm hopeful we will be able to, then we would need to start entering into some sort of live streaming or larger groups of google classrooms, where a teacher, instead of having a class of maybe 25 or 26 in a google classroom, we may have to have larger numbers, and so then that's why the year-long decision, or not doing it every quarter becomes very challenging for we. 
If I'm a teacher 
and I'm running a google classroom of 45 kids and 
now some that those classrooms want to go back, what classroom are what classroom going into? 
Where am I fitting what classroom into 
so then you're having to change people's schedule? 
It's a lot of moving parts, it is and then, if um, so we have so children are able to through children parents, choose whether children want to come back to school or not. 
Our teachers are not electing whether Our teachers're coming back to school. 
The the teachers that are staying home to do the remote learning are the teachers that have um reasons why The the teachers that are staying home to do cannot return, and so, even if tomorrow, you know three weeks after school started, all of our remote learners said well. 
This is for the birds. 
I don't like This. 
I want to go back to school. 
We wouldn't then have the ability to bring them back, because, even though We did the classrooms for them, We wouldn't at that point, have the ability. 
Would We well not at this time, because again, with six feet, We are, you know down to the amount of numbers that We have, 
but if, if We numbers look as such, where um the remote learning is um a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms, let's say, for example, instead of our numbers look as such, where um the remote learning is um a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms being 17, that might only be 13 or 14. 
So then We could start welcoming our numbers look as such, where um the remote learning is um a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms back, but that would be based on almost you know, looking at each student individually and being able to see how We can schedule our numbers look as such, where um the remote learning is um a larger quantity than our elementary classrooms back into school, which is probably a very physical impossibility in the next three weeks. 
It's a little hard 
yeah 
um with our secondary schools um as a as a secondary mom. 
It is it it kind of does stink 
and there's no two ways about it: 
our children, no child, is going to get the best education this year. 
It's just not going to happen and something 
We're going to try We best 
yeah 
We'll. 
Definitely try We 
best right um. 
If one, let's say somerset had an influx of you know. 
80 percent of their kids wanted to stay home and remote 
learn that would open up a lot more room, but it wouldn't necessarily mean that We would do somerset where their children win every single day and the rest of their. 
No, We would be making decisions that are consistent for all students, but then We might be reappropriating staff to help out in um other ways in other areas, and I don't want to put you on the spot, but it's okay. 
That's why We're here 
We're on the spot? 
Have We looked into sixth grade at all, because in my opinion sixth grade is that lost grade? 
It's a grade where they're a little too young to still stay home by they and not only just stay home for the day by they, but also teach they 
kind of you know get on this 
get on the schedule get on the computer. 
Do what you got to do? 
Keep yourself moving on that b day. 
Have We visited something that 
once We get all We numbers, because I know We can't really finalize anything until We get all these surveys and numbers, but once We get all those numbers, are We going to be able to maybe look at sixth grade going every day as a possibility? 
Yeah, that's absolutely you know
, that's definitely a conversation that we've been having as as soon as we know what the numbers are. 
Will we be able to welcome back additional grades, and 
I would I would assume that we would be having these conversations with with all of you, 
we administrative team, obviously as well um and sixth grade is one of those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off at um, because we know that those that was a really hard thing to kind of cut off could be 10 11 years old going into school, and I would not feel comfortable myself at times, leaving my child home for long periods, um, and so yes, we've had those conversations 
and once we know the numbers we'll be able to come back and report if we're able to make any changes good. 
Thank you. 
So much, no problem, just a quick question. 
Some clarification! 
Yes, um piggybacking a little bit on what mr scavo said. 
Are we entering the year making an assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver 100 of content in regards to secondary curriculum? 
If that is the assumption that I think you said that we're almost entering into um, 
I mean who's going to choose what topics and what's being covered. 
Are we letting different teachers different people it just it concerns me that we're entering, I know, there's no perfect answer and there's no scenario that can right that, under these uh circumstances that you've, given you 
but um. I guess that makes more of mr scala's point is that if we're making the assumption that we're not going to be able to deliver content, we should be trying to uh wait till so many surveys come back and see how many kids we can actually get 
yeah and um. 
So no right, I don't have a perfect answer for it, but I can tell you what we're doing to set up for that um. 
I had a chair meeting a couple of weeks ago, so 
we instructional leaders in each department to talk about that, especially at the secondary level, and so we would be looking at we 
curriculum at what are the big ideas at the end of the school year. 
What is it that the students are expected to learn so the students can um. 
You know move forward and pass those classes and or regence exams, we're also hoping to have a little bit more guidance in terms of the state education department in terms of what they're going to do in relaxing standards and curriculum and testing so much in like how they had canceled the regents. 
we don't hope for that. 
we hope more for choice so that these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents. 
If these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents want to take it and see what kind of grade these students, who are working hard getting grades attending, will be able to at least have a choice for regents get 
um, I don't, I don't think we're looking. 
I don't think- 
and I know 
you mean it this way, but we're not assuming we're not going to be able to get through our curriculum, but we want to be real with we families. 
our curriculum could look a little bit different than what our curriculum normally does, and I know our teachers again hard workers are already looking at that. 
we've had some conversation, for example around science lab hours, usually that's seat time now 
the state education department has relaxed that, and that could be also a virtual. 
So we've already started those conversations once we come back into. 
Schools in we department means that we've been having anyway
, virtually we'll continue those talks and start looking at that together. 
So this at the secondary level state the new york state, creates the standards for apn regions right so haven't. 
Given we clarification, okay well, ap is through uh is through the board, and so we actually are, starting, as you know, uh a new ap capstone program at the high school, so 
those teachers that um are gonna begin teaching it for we this year those teachers that um are gon just went through the training for that 
and right now, ap is holding tight to what those teachers that um are gon're doing, but we also know that at the last minute those teachers that um are gon made some changes around what those teachers that um are gon did: testing wise, virtually um. 
So we are 
advocating- 
and I think mr o'keefe spoke about this 
earlier- 
while we have not heard a tremendous amount from we legislators at this time we have been advocating, through we local boces, we associations talking to talking to the board and just hoping for some teamwork for relief, so that families know that you know we're not looking to make any decisions that are going to make impacts for the students, but we also have to be real and the students have to work with we. 
So we're hopeful for that. 
No problem, aaron, the so by the weekend we will have uh the figures on how many people are opting for remote learning. 
Is that, yes, all right and the way we have it now is uh how many people're being committed. 
how many people can make a commitment for one full year, uh just just for my identification. 
Let's suppose it came back to say 30 percent of our district, one, which could be right, which could be what it could be sure. 
What does that change? 
Anything uh for we with the ab days or or or as meredith said, the sixth grade situation would, let's say, 30 remote for the year. 
Would that change uh? 
You know what we're doing right now. 
Yes, absolutely so like what I just said with business. 
Also gonna take you know. 
Where is the thirty percent 
yeah? 
It could be heavily weighted on the younger children. 
Right, you know, is a k12 pet families deciding they want to keep they home right. 
You know it really depends on the breakdown of the of the groupings and the grades of where that 30 percent is or is that 30 percent leaning more on one side of the district versus the other uh, it's not as clean as just if that 30 percent was thirty percent, but 
yes, spaced across our district. 
That would make it easier. 
We can see some movement, I'm just not sure that I could say for sure right now that it would be at the secondary level. 
We would just need to see where it is and just aggregate that and just look at it, and it also boils down to to 
you know certification areas too, as well. 
How much staff We have in um in each area? 
I fully understand mr scala's position on that. 
I really do understand, but I'm trying to trying to look at this, as if you put out a survey tonight which is already gone, but if you put a survey tonight which is already gone out- and a survey tonight which is already gone said your one mocking period 
and you could change your mind, 
then kind of I would say that you really we're stuck with what we've got this is. 
This is the way it's got to be because you don't know from market period of marketing period, how many students you're going to have. 
Is that accurate? 
Well yeah 
I mean, 
but, but that goes to back to what we said. 
we can't put out there that you can make the decision after each quarter. 
If we're not sure we're going to be able to offer that- 
and so I know it may have looked like it- 
was a little bit stricter than it sounds like the board was- was willing to move forward with 
and so again we're certainly open to putting in alternate language, and we could send it as as quick as you know, as soon as we're done here or first thing in the morning. 
I certainly don't want to prohibit anybody from not doing remote learning 
but um again, it's 
it's. 
we have to be practical in the size of we school district, so we can't say we're going to be able to offer things that smaller school districts can right away, but it is prohibitive based on on the numbers. 
So, yes, we might be able to offer that 
and we might be able to offer more grades into we secondary schools. 
we might be able to offer more space for we elementary students. 
we just won't know until we see all of those numbers getting to getting that number that we're seeking this weekend will drive uh where we go next, yes, 
and that's why it's challenging to be able to share with we staff and with we community 
what remote learning will you know essentially look like as well? 
If I don't have enough staff, I can't guarantee that you're going to be in a google classroom with a live teacher. 
I might not be able to offer that it may be based on whatever elective or store or grade that you're in it could be some sort of like a live streaming, but but again it really. 
it depends on on the numbers of the students that we have uh up against we as well. 
Thank you, jim just just real fast to pick it back. 
I apologize. 
I walked out for a second, if only 75 of the families respond to the survey. 
So now there's 25 of the kids. 
We don't know what the kids're doing no the default is that the kids're coming to school. 
Okay, yeah! 
Thank you no problem, so I know with elementary the teachers. 
Usually take the kids lunch when the students have their lunch. 
How are we working that, if the students're having a lunch in the classroom who will be supervising the students 
so uh? we do have obviously aid support. 
we are also working with we principals because we know that we're probably going to need some additional help with that um, but we also um know that uh. 
You know that lunch is managed um. 
I actually thought that there was some staff that was a part of the lunch periods that might be mistaken. 
Yeah I'd have to look at that um, but we are. 
we are having conversation to ensure that we have um the support we need for lunch, two more. 
Actually. 
What will clubs look like virtually? 
So that's that's another new and exciting uh question right. 
we definitely know that clubs are not going to be able to be maintained after school physically. 
we have started to work with an online platform called passport for good and an online platform called passport for good allows clubs to run virtually and note on all clubs activities attendance community service hours if a child is working any of those types of hours. 
So we have to enter into conversation with we teachers about what that could look like. 
we certainly don't want to not offer clubs, but 
you know once a week twice a week: what sort of activities? 
How will you meet with you know once a week twice a week: what sort of activities? 
Will google me be a part of it? 
Those are the questions that we're looking to have moving forward around clubs and one more with the staggered start times. 
Those are students still changing for gym class. 
we will not be changing for gym and we will not need to because we have moved team sports to the end and we're looking to do more um. 
You know personal fitness that isn't rigorous, but no we would not. 
we would not be looking to have any any uh. 
You know contact in that manner for our students 
[Music]. 
As I sat here tonight. 
I thought about saying absolutely nothing 
and I really don't know where to begin. 
I don't have a specific question. 
I can tell you that I'm incredibly angry internally right now uh 
and it's not at anybody in this room, but I thought that uh, I haven't organized my thoughts completely 
they're. 
Just bouncing around in my head, but I want to say a few things. 
First, I want to say that you did an outstanding job in the most difficult of circumstances. 
You've put together a plan. 
Every school district is in the same exact boat that we are in questions asked tonight by rob, 
alex laura meredith 
uh everybody here great questions, uh 
and we don't have the answers to any of those questions 
and we are going to be surprised. 
I think greatly by the things that we find. 
I think that you know people could look at what's going on here tonight and people may think that all of we agree on this model and think that this is what we have to do. 
I'm sure there are people watching this tonight 
streaming or we'll watch this later on 
and they'll think that if you're sitting here, I'm sitting here 
and I'm quiet that I must agree with this plan- 
and I think it's wonderful 
and I'm going to tell you that I don't 
it's rotten, it's a rotten plan. 
That's going to do tremendous damage to our children. 
I've been teaching for over 22 years. 
Now I can remember when I started there was goals 2000.
, maybe some people in the room. 
Remember that maybe you don't, then there was no child left behind 
and then most recently there was common core 
there's, never a time in which it seems like a bad idea
, can't come about a bunch of garbage and nonsense that does anything but improves the education of our children. 
As I sat here tonight 
and I watch that slideshow 
and I watch those desks sitting so far apart. 
I thought what kind of dystopian period of time have we entered into where we look at this, and we accept this as the quote-unquote
, what I hate to say the new normal, it's not normal to me. 
It's not acceptable to me. 
I want you to know that if it were up to me solely, I would defy the governor. 
I would send all of we children back to back to school. 
I would give all of our children that opportunity. 
I believe that his edicts are completely unrealistic in terms of delivering a sound education to our children and I believe his edicts are not well-based in terms of research and data and so on. 
So when we look at how many children have ended up with covid and what's happened to how many children, there's no question that covet exists. 
In my mind, I lost one friend to it. 
I almost lost a second several who had it very badly who thought how many children might lose how many children lives. 
So there's no question that covet exists. 
However, when I look at the numbers and when I look at children getting covered, what I see is that we response is disproportionate to what is going on 
and we are willing to just fall in line and listen to the leadership of this state, this country and do these things- 
and I know there are people who feel like me, and 
I know there are people who don't feel like me, a third of the survey respondents who have said I'm not comfortable sending my child to school, and I am all about parental choice. 
If you do not feel comfortable sending your child to school, then I encourage you not to 
I encourage you to homeschool. 
I encourage you to use the remote option if you're not comfortable with that. 
However, I feel, like I've, been denied my choice, which is to send my child to school. 
I'm willing to tolerate that risk based upon what I know, because I think that the damage being done to my child that still is in in school and the damage being done to other children is tremendous. 
I taught remotely for the last what three four months of school and when I tell you that I did as good of a job as anyone could do with live instruction every single day. 
All right. 
I worked very hard to do what I did 
and I watched kids slide into the great abyss and some of those children that I watched slide are supposed to go off. 
The princeton this fall are supposed to go to. 
Cornell are supposed to go to uh. 
You know you name school and and school're going columbia and so on uh. 
But yet I've watched each one of school slip 
and I've watched a few hold on, and I've watched the most needy students that I taught completely slip
, we're not getting that back. 
we are not, and here we are and here's where we're going 
so I'll leave on this particular note. 
Sometimes it's real easy to just go along 
and I feel terrible for people like you, folks, the administration here
, it's simple 
and I'm in the same boat as an educator. 
It's my job! 
It's how I support my family and live my life and as a result of that, I'm forced to comply, because if I don't I'm out of a job but the solutions, we've come up with my family're, not good solutions, my family're, terrible solutions, and my family are solutions that are going to harm each and every one of we children. 
And at some point I do believe that people who feel the way that I feel are going to have to think long and hard about how we stand up and demand what we want for we that we think is best. 
I just want to say before I ask my last two questions 
that was well said bill. 
I 
I feel exactly the same. 
we do 
so well said um. 
I just want to talk about um the boces, because we're also feeling some questions today about boces um. 
As I mentioned earlier in the meeting community meeting where there was only 50 people in that meeting, um, where there was only 50 people, there was 50 how many people 50 volunteers 
and then all of we staff as well 
yeah 
go ahead. 
Um, you know. 
Having worked for boces for going into my 29th year, you know over the decades things change school districts go to block schedule. 
Kings park did at one point: um school districts for financial purposes, decided that you know we don't want to send two bus routes to boces. 
we only want to have one route and, as a result, okay, they basically said to we agency look whirly standing in the am this year, or will whirly sending seniors in the am and juniors in the pm 
and they've changed things so that it accommodated whirly 
and we bosses always accommodated whirly and my concern with some of the questions with some of the students that are in cte classes, that are that are scheduled to go to carpentry and auto body, and- 
and you know whatever other programs whatever other programs signed up for- is that transportation becomes an issue if we have an a day b day, um those particular subject areas you have to be there every day you can't teach somebody how to sand the fender and paint the fender remotely. 
It's just not something that can happen, so I suggested earlier that maybe we should call boces, uh eastern south post and say look we pay anywhere from 14 to 20 000 tuition depending on the particular student. 
If they have an iep or not or if they need additional services um, we can only stand in the am because of the situation. 
we're in you know and get they feedback. 
You know, I don't believe we. 
I don't think they want to lose the tuition 
yeah. 
No, I agree and 
and uh- 
and you know I did appreciate that idea, because I'm not I 
I know you're in western 
but um it was just you know, shared with we, the model that they were running, and 
so we traditionally we're share 
we're told what we schedule is, but we are quite large 
and I agree with you- 
we pay an exorbitant amount of money into both season. 
It's certainly worth the conversation. 
The second thing we have in-house cte classes where we have cosmetology um, yes and- 
and you know using the same concept- 
I mean if we have to get uh we kids there every single day. 
The suggestion that you know we've we've done in you know boces is that we try to allocate you know: uh the junior students first year, students the am session this way 
the junior students could take that bus up every single day right and just have to get a ride home two two days out of the week 
and then the pm 
students or the second year. 
Students would actually attend cosmetology and pm because many of Students may have driver's license and license um. 
It's just another suggestion to be able to accommodate that population of kids. 
That really need to be there five days a week, especially cosmetology students that have licensing and all that stuff which, by the way our cosmetology teacher, I mean she. 
she really just went above and beyond to ensure that the kids had the experience the kids needed, even if it was virtually. 
So I agree with you 
and I do appreciate uh that feedback and 
then just the last thing is more of a more of a comment 
and it's frustrating because you I hear what bill saying I hear 
and if you don't mind, I really do uh. 
Mr coggins, I uh. 
I don't want you to think or anybody to think that Mr coggins, I just you know, laid low because of Mr coggins, I jobs. 
Um. 
I think everybody knows I came from a district where Mr coggins, I stood very tall against things that were coming down from the state education department. 
I think when you're talking about health, health's a little bit challenging, but I hope you understand- 
and I hope everyone in the community knows that at no point did. 
I think that I was doing this just because it was my job 
but because I really do want what's best for children like. 
I know all of us here, but I stand just as equally frustrated when you're out 
and you see people out and about in playgrounds and beaches 
and and whatnot and Mr coggins
, I're held to you know very different standards. 
But when I tell you that Mr coggins, I're working 18, 19 20 hours to make sure Mr coggins, I're given the best, 
I know it's not what we all want, but I do respect what you said 
and I really do appreciate uh that feedback. 
My last thing is really more of a statement and um. 
You know when I look at the guidelines for opening in new york 
and it seems like they print a new one every week, because they change the rules so crazy, um. 
You know you look at they. 
If I can say that you know john, when you said it was cryptic, it really is 
I mean you need to 
you know you can interpret this 50 differently. 
Yes, yes, 
but they have a mandatory column and 
then recommendations for best practices, which I don't understand, but it talks about um ensure that social distancing, six feet uh at least six feet or a physical barrier is maintained between individuals while in school facilities on school grounds, including cafeterias, unless safety or care of activities such as moving equipment or elevating elevators traveling in common areas requires shorter distance of individuals. 
But then number two says: if social distancing is not possible, individuals must wear acceptable face governments 
yep, that's exactly how we interpret what we talked about earlier if we have to move kids back into a classroom. 
The way I interpret this- and maybe legal legal counsel, give me 
you know this- 
and maybe legal legal counsel opinion right is that if we had to move desks closer together, okay to be able to not be able to, you know, uh accommodate the social distancing by putting masks on the kids, we would be able to do that 
and that's exactly how we started out we planning. 
If you remember we had looked at, I think it was the massachusetts model where we were looking to at least go no less than three feet 
and when we did that it was like 
everyone's high fiving 
each other everyone's coming back. 
This is great 
and I don't mean to put mr block on the spot, but we did receive guidance from legal and it looked as though that masks were not going to be appropriate alone, but we read the regulations the same as you. 
It was just as disappointing when we found out that was not to be mr o'keefe. 
The other day, um you'd mention that if we were able to go three feet, we could accommodate every student. 
Every kid come back. 
Every student we had every building make up a class for three feet, and so we were able to say that if parents felt safe for parents children to return that we were able to do that we hands are very tied um. 
In terms of that, and you know again, I don't mean to put you on the spot, mr black, but you may want to jump in 
then it was a few weeks ago where you know we thought that just mask face covering was going to be sufficient. 
If you couldn't maintain the social distancing uh, but then the governor's office came out and clarified that and said that no you have to have that physical barrier and um. 
So that then took away we what we thought was we ability to have face masks, but the face coverings are okay in the hallways and the bus. 
Yes, 
well, yeah, there's! 
No! 
It's not that's! 
Yes, nothing makes sense, but that is uh. 
That's 
that's what we're following so 
aaron um. 
As we all know, I should have had a swivel chair, john 
I'm just saying. 
Should I have a swivel chair, as we all know, um education is is not going to be pretty this year um 
and we want to give we children as much as we can 
and we've spent so many years working on this educating the whole child and worrying about social, emotional. 
I'm
, the most emotional person shouldn't be talking about this, but um. 
So a couple of things, our most vulnerable, social and emotional. 
As we see little children adapt much better. 
You see a two-year-old in target with a mask on it's, not a problem. 
Um, my teenagers find the mask, uncomfortable and, and 
so um hours. 
Six through 12, in my opinion, are we most mentally vulnerable 
and I just feel like um, because things are so different. 
Are things going to be able to just go down to the guidance counselor 
just go down to you know, or things like that like like, where things want to just go. 
Take five minutes with the guidance counselor or even the school psychologist. 
Is that still going to be fully in place opened to everyone? 
Is there also? 
I know that um. 
I know that over the the distance learning period last year that we sagem north um sel chairs they 
they did a tremendous job. 
Having a google meet also are are things for mental health in place 
and then my other question is 
what does recess look like in um in covid land in elementary um? 
I think 
yeah, 
because I think I lightly brushed over that. 
So I'm glad that you asked me about that 
because you know 
so last year was the big thing that we were taking away: five minutes from lunch and recess and uh see, there's always bigger fish to fry people um. 
So, with that bigger fish to fry people're gonna be allowed to go outside bigger fish to fry people're gonna be allowed to run it all off. 
Are bigger fish to fry people allowed to play on the play gyms? 
Are bigger fish to fry people allowed to play ball with one another, or is it 
you're going to stay there and just run in place 
and you're going to stay there and run in place 
and yeah? 
I mean, I think. 
Realistically bigger fish to fry people are children, we're going to do we best to set up so that it's a safe environment, but there's not going to be boredoms out there if bigger fish to fry people are playing ball. 
I can't tell you that we will bigger fish to fry people're going to be, as I said earlier, rotating between the fields that we have the playground equipment that we have and then the basketball courts, so we would obviously have equipment outside for that. 
we do have sanitizing stations that we will be utilizing for the students but 
again um. 
You know, as I said I think in the beginning. 
we do not want we students to come back feeling like we're in jail, and the first thing that we had on we slides was the social, emotional well-being of we students 
and I'm very proud of the program that we have built here, and we are just looking for unique ways whether it be virtual, more push in from we sel chairs. 
You know all project kindness, all of those things we'll still have all of those things this year. 
all of those things just may look a little bit different in terms of the mental health staff, ms graham and the office of student services. 
Now under the direction of mram better with ms graham, we will be deploying guidance counselor. 
All of those different all of those services are still in place, but we see we doing more proactive lessons as students come in and more 
push in into our classrooms, so that students feel comfortable. 
we know the issues that we're seeing out there again. 
our sel chairs have sent out a survey to we students at the secondary level, and I agree with you at the elementary level we're going to be doing more proactive, resiliency skill type of activities with our students. 
Our health teachers for the past year have been building a health workbook for the elementary schools that are rooted in all the resiliency skills that we have been studying using the university of uh pennsylvania. 
So we're really excited about what we can deploy for we students, and 
you know it goes back to yes
, we are so worried about curriculum 
and we are we are. 
we are going to work to ensure that all big ideas as much as we possibly can until this is all over is taught, but we first charge is just making sure that those kids feel happy and safe and healthy coming in 
and we staff as well. 
our staff as well has not only been teaching from home uh prior to the summer, but our staff as well also had our staff as well own issues that our staff as well may have been you know undergoing. 
So that is 
we number one goal here. 
Thank you no problem, mr keith. 
Mr science. 
Uh. 
One of the important questions that was asked this morning was about safety and about how kids are wearing kids masks on the bus kids're getting off the bus and now kids're walking into the building with kids masks on maybe a hood on, maybe a hat on and kids're not going to be as easily identifiable as kids have in the past. 
One of the suggestions was to wear lanyards with 
maybe id cards. 
I'm just wondering what else. 
If there's any other suggestions, if there's, how are we gonna, I mean? 
Obviously health and safety is number one concern that that is a that is a major concern of not being able to recognize kids and especially, ninth graders, who are now new to the building. 
So we don't know any of kids to begin with, and and sixth graders are now going in there right. 
So there's going to be a lot of unfamiliar faces and even more unfamiliar with me. 
Well, so not too unfamiliar only because we do have we transition meetings for all fifth graders going into the sixth grade and 
then sixth graders going into the ninth grade, and we did those virtually over the past few months prior to the ending of school. 
So all teams at the high school level, in conjunction with those middle school and then middle school to elementary school. 
we met on every single student, not just some, but all so those were able to physically see a picture of the student talk about the student all of those things, so so we're hoping right that there are similar, uh some familiar faces coming in 
but, like we had talked about this morning, the use of the student badges. 
we have never truly enforced the way that we need to now, but we would have to ensure that the students are maintaining that and showing that because the students will be wearing masks as the students come in. 
However, we are also spacing things out, so the kids aren't coming into school in mass quantities, so should, in fact you know, prior to all the badges coming out. 
You need to slip down just so. 
we can kind of recognize you put back up and go back in. 
I think we would feel safe and comfortable in terms of that, but we'll be working with we staff working with security and seeing what other measures that we can um, you know put into place. 
john. 
I don't know if you wanted to add anything to that. 
Just to pick you wanted to add anything to that back up. 
If we're going to have the kids wear the kids 
id cards just a matter of how fast can we get the idea? 
Yeah? 
That's 
the that's the only thing, and that's why I say in the beginning. 
we may just have to do the old-fashioned, put it down for a second, so I can see, but 
you know we is pretty astute and granted the ninth graders uh. 
we may not recognize them all, but 
we all you know. 
we know we students here 
so um, that's obviously 
another concern would be now 
we have another concern wearing another concern 
id cards and 
of course, we all know that 10 to 15 of the kids are either going to lose the kids or forget the kids. 
Do we have a mechanism to reprint the kids in the building daily so that everybody has one um? 
Thank you, okay, 
so just for the community, we we are able to duplicate that. 
Yes, thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss any other questions we moved on. 
I just wanted to make sure that we at least took a poll of where we stand. 
As on remote learning, did we want to take a poll and leave a poll at one full year of a commitment? 
Did we want to talk about a half year? 
Did we want to talk about a quarter? 
I think it's important that we do it now, so that we don't wait until last. 
Second and we're changing yes 
[Music]. I understand what rob was saying before about this. 
I'm just curious why it wouldn't be sufficient if we just changed the language to where we could evaluate if it were possible and had people understand that it could potentially be that long, but we could, of course, if situations allow we can, we can, we can shorten it and truncate the time period. 
Can I just ask a question to mr block: 
I mean I 
just just because I can foresee I'm sorry jim just because I can foresee something are 
we are 
we even legally allowed to tell somebody they're not allowed to come back? 
That's you know
, that's 
a that's an unanswered question. 
You know 
and it's unprecedented um from a legal standpoint, and 
you know I understand fully the operational issues from a legal standpoint. 
You're going to want to see more flexibility, because the concern is that family will say that being denied. 
My right education, My right education responds back, is no 
you're being educated, being educated remotely, but that's not the same type of education as an in-person education. 
So from a legal standpoint, I would recommend that there be some flexibility built in. 
I was actually going to state that if you were going to do that, um still keep the year uh, but have a reevaluation the ability to be able to re-evaluate, as ms heinz said, that that's going to occur on a student-by-student basis. 
Anyway, if there's a concern from a parent, but parents are maybe being a little bit um, not almost like misled, but don't not aware of the fact that there may be a re-evaluation, but that's something you may want to clarify, and you could do it in an interval period. 
You could do it. 
You know after the first quarter, 
yeah, 
that's as a re-evaluation, for example. 
Yeah 
I mean 
yeah. 
One of my concerns would be is that my concerns realize what remote learning entails and my concerns're like I. 
This is not what I signed up for we're not going live, we're not doing this or not right, and then we get an influx of kids and now class sizes grow 
and we don't have the space to have everybody in. 
So I just I want to make sure that we have that flexibility
, I'm sorry jim 
[
Music]. Well, my position is I like what bill just said. 
my position was to get the true figures. 
The way it went out was probably the right way to go, so people aren't saying. 
Well, I can experiment for a while 
and we never really get a true picture, but 
at the same time I think if you put it if the language was softened up to say, the possibility of a full year is real uh. 
However, you know there's going to be uh, independent cases that have changed, etc, etc. 
So we all know that we all know that this could all change, but to get the true figure up front. 
I think they have to be aware that this could be a full year of remote learning. 
Uh. 
Yes, that's just my opinion. 
Yeah 
and I apologize. 
I don't have the survey in front of me. 
I don't, I think I said could be, but I don't recall, but we could certainly again put that out once we see the numbers and if, in fact we feel like, maybe families felt a little bit um, it was too strong and 
families're, not really quite sure we can. 
we could send a call out. 
we could send out an email as quick as you know now, if we wanted to the reason why I asked that question 
is: is that we based that plan on every single student returning? 
Yes, we did 
so the issue is not space. 
the issue is scheduling. 
Yes, that's correct right! 
Yes, so I view the issue as well and and because of the six feet right, you know obviously space because of that, but the six feet parameters is what allowed we to go to this plane to accommodate every kid. 
They should be right. 
So if we don't have all if, if not all kids return, then we will have more space, obviously and then can bring back more kids. 
So so the thing is like I said: the issue is not the space matter. 
You know that plan on every single student was devised based upon every single student returning and that's why I suggested you know, maybe doing that plan on every single student once you know one or four times a year um. 
You know. 
For that reason, I understand that it could be a nightmare scheduling. 
Well if the restrictions aren't lifted, I guess we have 13 kids. 
In a seventh grade, honest math class 
and we're looking at a schedule, you're going to look at the section 
say all right put 13 kids in mrs smith's class or put 13 kids in yes correct. 
Yes, so you know the issue is that you have this. 
You have more space, it's just more of a scheduling thing, and I would imagine that if more and more kids come back from remote learning, we could reassign teachers to classrooms. 
Yes, well, and- 
and that's the point right 
so in a year where we're already saying the curriculum's interrupted the day has been corrupted. 
That's the only thing that we wanted to minimize in the beginning and get a true account, because you don't want to be moving teachers around and upheaving schedules, but we can of course always hand select and uh. 
You know put students in as outliers who really do need to come back, but we didn't want to forget. 
I don't know who said it before. 
we just didn't want people thinking, I'm going to try it out for a week 
and if I don't like it I'll, go because we're just. 
That would be really good. 
A quarter um you know, and that will give we enough time to do the planning and do the scheduling if we have, if we had to. 
I just think that the one year signing something this is one year, scaring heck out of people based upon the phone calls that I received today. 
So I guess we'll have to then decide. 
Are we doing flexibility? 
The flexible option, obviously is the best for everybody, but do we want to say one year or do we want to say by quarter, and I guess we'll vote on that. 
So if you want to do a full year, write it with flexibility, you can vote on that full year. 
Flexibility, yes, so just put we'll put we hands up 
and I'll 
just we'll count them all full year with flexibility or flexibility with re-evaluating every quarter. 
Okay, so yes, but maybe we could put what would be the best way to well 
yeah. 
I think that what I suggested would be if you want to stay with the full year, but that you re-evaluate on a quarterly basis 
yeah, 
because I just caution we to 
if we all of a sudden say flexibility, then people
, you know I 
just we have to have a true account. 
School starts in two and a half weeks, and I 
I don't mean to be crafts about that, but 
we we really do, and so I think, mr black, the way that you had said it um. 
I think you know it's a year, but we would be reevaluating it throughout the year for everybody. 
I I 
I like what he said. 
Does that mean? 
No? 
I don't think that you're going to make that full commitment. 
I don't think you can quite frankly 
yeah. 
So I think that the concern was being raised was that parents, under the impression that you know no matter what I do 
it's a year now, 
if I commit it's a full year, that's not going to be the case. 
we're going to look at it on a quarterly basis. 
Again, it's change. 
There could be a week wake up tomorrow with an executive order which states that parents, you know, can make the choice on daily basis. 
You know 
so um you know, so I uh. 
I think that what it's going to be is that the district will look at the district. 
we're going to look at we operational needs, we're going to look at the parental needs and make you know an informed decision, but that the benchmark be on a quarterly basis. 
Would the benchmark be on a quarterly basis help if we provided some sample language 
and then you're able to let we know if that language looks appropriate, because we can send that out. 
You know as quick as uh. 
You know sunday evening or monday morning for folks perfect. 
Thank you any other questions. 
All right. 
we are back in the agenda letter f approval of minutes. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr mike caruso second and by meredith opie. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried number two. 
we are in the visitors section public comment that pertains to the agenda. 
I'm just going to need those cards 
or, if you're going to call those cards, is fine too 
yeah 
sure I'm going to call up the names we do have several. 
I just wanted to make a reminder announcement that the visitor section, the public comment is in fact a public comment. 
It's not a question and answer type of period, so I know that some of the cards that we are getting do have questions on some of the cards that we are getting. 
I think possibly it's better. 
You know to if, if questions are asked, we can have 
questions are asked written down and we can take your email 
and we can have a response sent to you by email. 
If that's good or mr picarella, if you want, we can also include 
questions are asked in we forum on monday. 
That's fine right 
yeah. 
I just think it would possibly be best to email 
or you know, speak with you separately regarding 
okay, um. 
So the first gentleman, mr caputo
, I'm sorry capuano, 
oh okay, my name is capuano. 
My daughter is capuanocapuano. 
My daughter goes to sagem, you have an excellent school here and you have an excellent school because you have the best teachers in the country. 
I believe, when you take the best teachers in the country away, you have a bunch of buildings here: 
okay, uh, to think that you're going to lock a child in a room with a bunch of books 
and if you could fast forward 10 years that, like a doctor or a lawyer, is going to walk out of a room with a bunch of books. 
It's just not going to happen. 
Okay, now the main reason that we're all here is the six foot: six foot: six foot: six foot- 
that's all we're here for why? 
Don't we tell everybody that that's a farce? 
If you build the partitions around the desk, the six foot is not necessary and I called osha 
and I called the governor's hotline. 
Okay, if you build the glass petition, the best teachers in the country are worried. 
Also. 
I understand that if you build a glass petition against the front, the best teachers in the country could walk in the back and the best teachers in the country would be behind the glass petition. 
711 protects the best teachers in the country cashiers and they all come in when it's time for the best teachers in the country shift and the best teachers in the country're back there. 
Furthermore, the best teachers in the country could walk in behind the best teachers in the country petitions and take the best teachers in the country masks off. 
the best teachers in the country could be up there with the blackboards and take their masks off 
and everything would be back to normal. 
This is all we're all here, because we're refusing to build their petitions. 
You could take the desk. 
There's schools that have taken the desk 
and they divide it like this boom and boom 
and there's four children on the desk 
and it's totally legal you can be. 
When you put a mask on then or any kind of petition, they said you could be nose to nose. 
I was just in a restaurant that was so packed the booth, the person right behind me 
I turned around. 
I was looking right in his face. 
I called the hotline from there 
because- 
and they said as long as there's a petition, there was a petition in between the booths and the glass petition was only this tall. 
I was looking in the guy's eyes 
and they said there's no regulations for the height of the glass petition. 
Okay, so all we need is the glass petition, and all this is gone. 
Okay, second of all, second solution: why don't you just have the people that want to come into school and the teachers that want to come into school come in and the ones that want to stay home and the children that want to stay home stay home instead of forcing the ones that are horrified to come in to come in and the ones that are desperate to come back in. 
My daughter wants My daughter teachers and My daughter wants My daughter school and My daughter wants My daughter friends. 
Okay, what? 
If all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in? 
Everybody who needed to came in to to help and all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in kept america going to mind odds that the schools are the only ones that let us down now, as this gentleman said these kids in five years, if us could fast forward to the ones that are starting now, all the cops and firemen and what, if the truck drivers that supply the supermarket didn't come in won't be able to read and write. 
I don't know how many people go to europe, but these kids already can't read and write. 
us are kids in college. 
That can't add this 
is the death knell of america. 
This is not some small thing here that you're deciding 
and there's no reason. 
These are guidelines. 
Schools all around you hop hog everything else open five days. 
This is your decision to do in the generation right here. 
Remember that this is the beginning of the end of america, okay, god. 
us hope that they rescind this, but if they don't rescind this, this few years here will be known as the covid dummies. 
they won't make this few years here into college. 
they won't do anything and there's no reason 
and anyway. 
Lastly, I want to say, if you open the schools, why bother the first kid or the first teacher that gets covered you're going to close all of sagem? 
So this is all the foss all this money, the reopening programs and everything. 
It's all a big fuss, 
okay, it's it because this is being treated like the bubonic plague. 
capuano, I'm sorry there's a three minute time limit. 
Okay, thank you. 
Studies all around the world have opened up. 
There's not one case. 
The ymca tracked The ymca own tracing 40, 000. 
Kids, not one mr kevin. 
Thank you very much for coming. 
We appreciate it. 
Thank you so much for listening 
and I wanna say. 
Lastly, the governor said this is for We to talk not three minutes. 
I listened to this young lady for three hours. 
That was not the guidelines. 
You're worried about guidelines, guidelines, the governor said the people should be able to come in and talk not listen to. 
The ymca tell me what to do with my child. 
Okay. 
Thank you very much. 
Okay, uh miss uh muchitash. 
Please can I just start sure 
yeah 
um hi, my name is lauren mukhitash 
um I've been in station for 13 years 
now I have elementary age children, I'm going to jump the agenda. 
Oh I'm sorry
, um, I'm going to jump the agenda a little bit uh and go to item 12. 
um there's been a proposal to create a divor diversity task force in sacrum, central school district. 
I'm here to voice my support for the creation of that task. 
Force sachem student body is comprised of 25 percent racial minority students. 
Our e and l students represent a staggering 98 different languages spoken within this district of 13 000 students. 
Our students represent a multitude of cultures, religions and abilities representation matters. 
Our multifaceted student body deserves to see Our students reflected in Our students teachers and administrators in the books 
Our students have access to and read and then the curriculum Our students are taught. 
So I would just plead with the board. 
Please don't render this to a toothless subcommittee with no power. 
There are lots of things that I love about sagem, and I think that this is a step in the direction to improve upon what Our already have a strong foundation for. 
Thank you. 
I'm sorry. 
Next is uh. 
Mr warren hi uh, my name is jason moore, I'm a parent in the community, uh sageman graduate. 
I would like to make a plea to the board: please value and respect the school community by maintaining a high standard of transparency and communication at all times, but particularly in times of crisis. 
The communication from the central office and the board has been unacceptable. 
The communication from the central office and the board is essential for every member of the school community students, teachers and families to be constantly updated at all times about every aspect of the reopening process. 
The meeting 
The meeting was not advertised to the school community at large. 
There were five parents outside barely and five parents left please as soon as possible, communicate the following. 
Please communicate the following immediately. 
How will we ensure that we remote students are receiving an equitable education? 
I can't accept that our remote students are receiving an equitable education will receive a subpar education. 
You've put in your email that I received. 
While I was standing up front says it will not be the same. 
I need it to be equitable. 
I need my child to get an equitable education. 
They need to be live instruction and ongoing assessment. 
We need to figure it out. 
We need to put programmers in place. 
We need to figure it out. 
it has to be figured out. 
We cannot make an exception where part of We is receiving a subpar education. 
It's not acceptable, not acceptable to me should not be acceptable to you 
and it's not acceptable to your teaching staff. 
I know that for a fact. 
Secondly, a building space plan must be made available to the teacher to the parents of the school community with individual room measurements and the capacity to maintain authentic social distancing at all times, and I need to know about the source of ventilation. 
I need to know what the school buildings look like. 
If you're telling me 17 kids in a classroom, I need to know that there's room for 42 square feet for every 17 one of those students I need. 
I need that in writing. 
Before I even think about sending my child back, I need clear opportunities for all parents to participate in this process. 
I shouldn't stumble upon this. 
I should be knowing about this weeks in advance. 
I need specific criteria for testing and tracing in all school buildings. 
I need a contingency plan for what happens when the rate of transmission rises above three percent. 
What do I do with my child? 
How do I make accommodations? 
I need to know these things before we put we kids on those buses. 
It's unacceptable that you're asking me to put a remote survey in place by friday, and your first parent meeting is on monday. 
That's unacceptable. 
The parents need to know. 
What's going on, the school community needs to know. 
What's going on, the teachers need to know, everybody needs to know it's unacceptable, please. 
I need you to do a better job of communicating with the school community. 
Most important details need to be related to about our children's education in the future. 
Please address these issues immediately. 
The students, the teachers, the families in the school community deserve at least this much. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much. 
Miss favaro campbell hi, I'm michelle for campbell. 
I wanted to just address the board about the diversity task force. 
As all of you know, I started that email and requested that that email be put on the agenda and that you all consider creating one. 
that email's been 10 years 
that I, my daughter, started 
well she's going to be a senior now 
so 10 years ago I actually started talking to a lot of district office, which is very changed now. 
Maybe mr scavo might have been on the board of ed 
back then I don't remember, but most of you are not 
we're not then um. 
It's been 10 years, since my family started talking about the having more diversity and representation within sachem 
and I'm really excited to see 
It finally make an agenda. 
I want to also make It really clear that It's about race, religion and abilities. 
I want children in wheelchairs to see children in wheelchairs in books in children in wheelchairs classrooms. 
I want children with autism to know that children with autism are just as represented as every other kid in every princess book in every superhero story, and I want to help show our curriculum expand to teach children that kids with down syndrome can be teachers, because there are stories of preschool teachers who have down syndrome and kids, who are deaf and blind can grow up to graduate harvard law, school and become disability advocates and travel the entire world, and 
I 
right now our just don't show that our don't have the staff. 
our don't have diversity in the staff. 
our don't have diversity even in the books that they see when they walk into a classroom. 
So I just wanted to thank you all for putting it on the agenda tonight and for entertaining the idea and to understand that the idea's actually bigger than one issue, it's about every kid at sagem walking into their classroom, walking through hallways and right now, where I know reopening and dealing with covid, but this has been 10 years actually a little bit more in the making and sacrum 
is going to go on long before my daughter, who's going to be a senior and my son is going to be a freshman in high school my daughter, who's going to be a senior and my son is going to be a freshman in high 
school're going to be gone, and I don't want to leave that task force like I want this to be 10 years from now. 
Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program has a very different experience than what Every kid who's just coming into kindergarten or the upk program had, and so that's really important to me that you all knew that. 
So. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Miss sanders, hello, everyone, 
oh hello, everyone, maria sanders, um! 
I am a parent um. 
I would like to just make a statement um in respect to the reopening committee. 
I 
I was a member of the reopening committee 
and I just would like to express my disappointment in the fact that the reopening committee had no part in the actual planning or process of of the plan that was presented to the community. 
My understanding was that we would be part of that process, but instead we had two meetings where we were basically given the list of directives as administration and and the board of vet had planned. 
So basically, we got a sneak peek and the ability to ask a few questions, though I certainly respect the time and effort and energy that administrators put in, and I will not take anything away from that. 
You fail to utilize the very volunteers that you asked for because there was a tremendous amount of talent within that grouping 
and we certainly could have helped you in putting together the plan that was presented to the community for myself having students in second in middle school and high school. 
I recognize that the plan that was presented to the community is not going to be adequate for myself having students in second in middle school and high school and again, though
, I understand right now, we we're hoping that the testing standards are loosened. 
The value of a full-time education will not be, and these children cannot get a full-time education when these children're in school. 
Fifty percent of the time these children're only seeing a teacher, fifty percent of the time and 
these children're these children're sitting home in front of a computer for the other 50 that amounts to 10 days a month when normally these children would be in school for five days a week. 
So I just asked that in the future, when you come to the community- 
and you ask we to step up and come in and help you really utilize we, because we voice 
really has not been heard. 
That's it! 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Uh miss williamson, nicole williamson, okay, uh, miss cologne, 
hi everyone, I'm josephine scalon. 
I have a soon to be second and third grader, and I just have a question because I'm still undecided about the virtual verse going to action school. 
If you go to school and you start in action school, do you have the option of then going virtual? 
Would that be an option? 
So I'm sorry go ahead. 
I'm sorry! 
So we're in this portion of the agenda. 
we're not allowed to do back and forth and answer questions. 
If you'd like we can have your question written down and leave your contact and we will answer any question that you have. 
I can promise thanks. 
Thank you very much. 
Is it allison? 
Is it on the court? 
Is allison email on the card? 
There's a phone number on the card. 
Do you want to put an email perfect? 
Thank you so much um, the next one was also um several questions. 
Would you prefer to contact this person as well? 
I mean 
I mean this person's been waiting, so if this person wants to ask this person 
and then it's miss rep rapuno, okay, thank you, 
yeah! 
That's all! 
For the first section uh we are on page two at the bottom number. 
Three business items consent agenda a through c, 
and I have a motion. 
Please motion by bill cogan second, by laura slattery. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
Motion is carried sorry bottom of page three personnel consent agenda. 
A through 
l. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed abstentions. 
This is kate bleedin. 
So This is an unusual way to welcome many of our new staff, as our um are having our first kind of live forum most of the time our have folks here to welcome them in person, and some of you are virtual. 
our would like to welcome all of our new staff that our vetted through really intense interview processes this summer with our administrative staffs in the building and staff members, uh faculty uh involved in the reopening process and 
um. 
That includes clerical custodial teachers, teachers, assistants 
and I think our have also gotten to um the administrative section. 
Did I catch that correctly? 
Okay, so our're through the l- 
and I just want to welcome those folks that are in consent, agendas, uh. 
So far, thanks number five is support staff consent agenda a through j. 
Can I please have a motion motion by meredith second, by jimmy and caruso. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried christie. 
Did you want me to stop again 
yeah 
cause? 
I think you have michael there. 
Yep uh joining our today is michael um. 
michael is over here to my left, 
the far right, if you wanted to just stand and give yourself a wave, uh michael, is joining our today, as the network and systems administrator michael's been a integral part of our technology, um staff who have been working with jack renda in it. 
our're really excited about all the great things that our're going to continue to get the growth for our technology as our push through and put our smart schools um investment through and and enhance the use of our technology for our students and our staff. 
So welcome michael, our are on the top of page 12 number six personnel administrators consent agenda. 
A through g motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried 
okay
, our'd like to take a moment to recognize two other folks in the uh audience today. 
Uh joining our is dennis mcelherne um. 
If you want to give a wave- 
not quite sorry, I'm trying to stay on top of it here. 
They're. 
This close, this close sorry guys a little more suspense this close 
sorry guys're going to be towards the top of page 14 
letter h, probationary appointment of the administrative personnel. 
There you go andy. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr coggins? 
Second by mr wadawa discussion, discussion um. 
I will be voting uh no on this in the next two personnel items. 
Uh. 
My reasons are the same as My reasons've been for the past several board meetings concerning central administrative positions. 
That is, I believe, the new superintendent should be part of the process in any administrative appointments. 
Uh. 
What I must make perfectly clear is that these candidates, as well as those from the prior meetings, are qualified and capable of the positions to which they are being offered, and I would fully support they if the new superintendent was part of the process. 
So this is a process, negative vote and nothing to do with the personnel uh. 
the new superintendent is close. 
I mean we're almost there 
and we certainly have qualified staff who could perform these functions for a short time as interims, so that for that reason, and that reason alone, I'm voting no on the next three administrative positions. 
I must stress it has nothing to do with the individuals. 
I fully support the individuals and would support the individuals in the future. 
Mr kieran, just because you asked for a discussion and for the public and anybody at home by losing our superintendent, our assistant superintendent and our special ed director, our would have left three positions open where our would have needed interims and just for argument's sake, mr o'keefe. 
What is the going rate for an interim at that level per day? 
For which position are our speaking? 
Let's say it's: the new superintendent um rates vary, but a going rate for superintendent is probably 12 to 1300 a day, and then what about the assistant super? 
An assistant superintendent, depending upon which position it could be 800 to 1000 a day and an executive director of special ed would also probably be in a similar range, a minimum of 800 a day. 
So what and- 
and I don't necessarily disagree with your argument- 
but what what our did was our took a vote to have these positions filled. 
our had three people doing five people's jobs and it between losing that on a normal year is almost impossible, but losing it during covet is is impossible um and our put things into motion to have these positions filled by qualified people to save that money, and this is money that 
I mean our our already just talked about taking custodians off- 
that our don't even know if buildings are going to get cleaned in time. 
Now our want to take more money out by filling these positions with indoors. 
I think that that's a slippery slope if we go down that path. 
Well, I appreciate what you're saying uh my my uh. 
My position is that a superintendent of schools, uh, is the single most important person in the district and totally accountable to us and the district for making decisions and to have a superintendent of schools, not part of the process. 
Even though a new superintendent come in and doesn't know, the personnel is certainly going to ask the qualified people who who the personnel are and do cement and be part of the process. 
I 
I think that's even more important than the saving of a few dollars here and there, 
but that's 
I mean 
I
, I see I'm alone in that position, but I stand by that position. 
I 
I understand where you're coming from I just if I don't appoint somebody until september 1, that's a long period of time at thirteen hundred dollars a day, eight hundred dollars a day, and while it seems like a few dollars here and there over a three month period that we haven't had people that it starts to add up, and when we need money down the line, I would be afraid that we put the line on in a room 
is when we had qualified people who could take these positions immediately? 
I will remind you of your fiscal prudence soon, 
[Laughter] alex just because we're having a discussion, so mr kiernan, the people that were appointing tonight, I I have personally known all of them. 
So it's without hesitation that I think that them are the best fit for sachem. 
I don't care who our superintendent is. 
I've trusted mr o'keefe, as our interim superintendent, to make the recommendations, and I 100 percent agree that any superintendent coming in will not find any better candidates than the ones our're putting forth tonight. 
Opposed motion is carried dennis uh, our're going to start with andrew larson, 
so andrew larson just want to welcome you to the high school north principalship 
um, andy has been a teacher in our schools. 
andy's been in personnel, andy's been in an elementary hiawatha principleship, a sagamore principalship, an ap and two of our high schools, uh and now andy's joining the ranks of the leader um ship in north and our'd like to welcome you and wish you all the best our are on letter. 
I probationary appointment of the executive director for special education. 
Can I have a motion. 
Please motion by mr scavo seconded by mr coggin. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried [Applause] dennis mclehern. 
[Applause
] dennis mclehern's [Applause] 
dennis mclehern's welcome back to sacham. 
[Applause
] dennis mclehern has been in our school district working as a school psychologist, an assistant to uh coordinator for special education. 
[Applause] dennis mclehern left for a short stint to go over to north bab as a director over there 
and we're really lucky to have 
[Applause] dennis mclehern back and part of we team as the executive assist executive director for special education. 
Welcome back [Applause] and letter j is an approval of an saa agreement for the executive director for special education. 
Can I please have a motion motion by ms slattery? 
Second, if I miss volpe, all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
we are on the bottom of page 14. 
contracts consent agenda. 
A through t. 
Can I please have a motion ocean by mr coggins second by mrs wadwa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried. 
we are on the bottom of page 20.. 
It's an action, itemist number, a mandated new york state board, training for matthew, bauman and robert scavo, all in favor, 
get kind of a motion motion by mrs volpe second by mr man. 
Caruso all in favor opposed motion is carried number 
b. 
It's an appointment of board committee members. 
Can I please have a motion motion by miss lottery second by mr scavo. 
Any questions all in favor opposed motion is carried. 
Letter c. 
Is a board of education retreat? 
Can I please have a motion motion by ms wado, a second by mr bauman, all in favor. 
Any questions sure I just want to make a quick comment: um, especially since we're being fiscally prudent, a retreat is not like gurneys or something 
it's where we all sit in a room and talk. 
I just want to make sure that that's clear, because we all are not going on vacation, though, because my first year I was prepared for gurney's 
and then we all sat in the same set library. 
Thank you. 
we all are on the top of page 22.. 
I'm sorry 
are we all I apologize. 
Can I uh all in favor opposed motion is carried the top of page 22 donations consent agenda a through c. 
Can I please have a motion motion by mr coggin second by miss ottawa. 
All in favor opposed motion is carried number 10 at the bottom of page 22 committee on special education consent agenda, a through b motion by miss volpe. 
Second by mr mancaruso, all in favor opposed motion is carried number 11 monthly reports. 
So we all there was a question from the community about when the committees would start meeting and how I think that, maybe, if people that were leading these committees, we all want to maybe set some dates. 
we all could do something virtually I'd like to see the budget committee start talking about if there was a possible mid-year cut and look into any and all options that there was. 
I don't know if there was anything else that you may want to look into, but that's just one that I thought of. 
I don't know about the budget committee. 
If mr kiernan has anything for the budget committee, okay, all right number, 12, we all are back on public comment. 
This portion of public comment will be on any and all items that anybody wants to speak at. 
That's not on the agenda, and everyone will have three minutes to discuss and, like we all said before, this is not a q a and a back and forth, but we all do want everyone to be able to be heard. 
That wants to be heard. 
Okay, the first one is miss young 
[Music]. Oh, I press this. 
Yes, thank you for waiting for so long. 
Thank you. 
You guys have been outside the season board of education, members and community. 
It's come to my attention that vp sarah waterworld wore a bill. 
Okay, okay, we all're a blm t-shirt at a board of education meeting. 
This is unacceptable. 
I can respect a person's right to free speech and to have their opinion. 
However, blm is a political movement and blm does not belong at our border bed meetings or in our schools and indoctrinations. 
The definition of a racist is paramount in the name of black lives matter. 
the name of black lives indicates that black lives matter over the other races. 
This is unacceptable and this racism does not belong, including blm is putting blm over our law enforcement, which many of our community are employed and of all races this once again making blm a black organization. 
Furthermore, new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives matter foundation to see solicitations of new york donations that has new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives have not registered as a charitable organization. 
new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives do not know whether the blm t-shirt, that was worn was for the black lives foundation or movement in either case. 
It has no right 
if any one of the board members wore my hat supporting trump, I'm sure the same thing would happen. 
The apology that was put on facebook was cynical and scolding. 
Call new york attorney general attorney general james or the black lives as all races and insisting blm is not is not a political issue. 
Last I checked. 
Everyone in america had the same rights regardless of race, sex, color and sexual orientation. 
As specific cases of discrimination are happening in our community, then our must address those issues. 
What offended me is the use of rap music before sporting events, glorifying women's segregation, drug use and the cursing and the songs with the word and in the word this is not acceptable. 
If we are going to talk about discrimination, we are going to talk about discrimination 
can we are going to talk about discrimination's got to be used both ways. 
So, let's start by banning that bml, not political, tell that to the murder black trump supporter bernal tramell. 
Furthermore, the disgusting political use of blm as an attack on our police and blue lives is not acceptable. 
Our community of all sects and races is made up of law enforcement. 
blm is declaring war against all blue lives matter. 
Miss young there's a three-minute time limit. 
Thank you. 
Thank you very much, miss o'connell, so conor. 
Thank you very much for waiting. 
I know that it's been a while 
okay. 
Well, I am beyond angry at what is going on with our children. 
Okay, our are not doing the right thing by our children in any way, shape or form at this point in time whether our want to send our children to school or keep our children home. 
Neither of those options currently are acceptable. 
I sent everybody board members in email. 
I got one reply challenged every one of board members to go and spend 10 minutes in one of the one of the classrooms. 
On the first floor in the second floor of one of the high schools did any of you do that 
yeah? 
I didn't think so. 
Yet you all think it's fine, obviously that we have no ventilation in the classrooms for crying out loud. 
we have to have special ventilation in the malls and other businesses, but where we most vulnerable are 
we don't? 
None of you would work in these classrooms in the current conditions, None of you. 
So why would you think it's okay for our children to be in there even before this, but definitely now now the air in those classrooms just stands there, because there's no movement, 
there's, no, 
nothing and covert will stand in the air in those classrooms until it falls down on somebody 
so you're putting our children in an environment that is guaranteeing that if somebody has gold, but it's going to get on all the rest of our children horrendous, 
it's despicable and now I'm hearing that remote learning is going to be a joke. 
That's not okay! 
Either! 
Okay, I don't want my child in one of those rooms. 
I want my child safe, but my child is taking five ap classes next year, which means my child needs a robust distance learning program. 
But my understanding is 
our're not doing that. 
Am I incorrect? 
No okay. 
So what our're doing to our children is despicable and you should all be ashamed of yourself just a second. 
Mr block, just a second, mr kyle 
I'll get your answer question right now. 
I had a conversation with kyle. 
You know, I know that you were asking the question about the uh being restricted in terms of the assembly 
yeah, 
but it's pursuant to the governor's executive order, one of the number of executive orders 202.45, I looked. 
I believe I looked at that one, and that was talking about social media. 
This is okay, 
I'm just gonna back up just a little bit 
just so our can keep our space now. 
It talks about non-essential gatherings. 
Yes, and this is not essential. 
That's correct as long as while we're virtual, because you still have the option of being virtual, the board decided to assemble. 
Oh 
so so our decided. 
This was not essential. 
So because you decided the governor, that's not that they don't decide. 
No! 
So who decides well, there's based upon the governor's orders. 
the governor said that this is an honest. 
the governor said that we can conduct this meeting virtually or yes, 
you can 
yes 
but 
yeah. 
So as long as you can conduct it, virtually meeting is considered to be non-essential because you have the ability to be able to connect the virtual reality. 
Okay, thanks thank you for that. 
It's, mr black, so 
202.45 
It was extended by 202.53 and 
it's in effect, until august 20th, 
okay, next fury good evening, I'm a proud sacrum educator and a parent of three daughters who attend sageman schools. 
I'm here tonight to voice my concerns regarding the secondary reentry plan. 
I have a daughter in eighth grade 
and I also have a senior. 
I have grave concerns regarding the lack of an equitable education for our secondary students. 
These children will suffer the ramifications of this decision in which These children will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
In some instances, this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come may change the course of These children adult lives. 
I don't want that to happen to my children 
and I don't want it to happen to anyone else's. 
I implore you to reconsider the secondary reentry plan and attempt to find a way to make the secondary re-entry plan more equitable, so that our chm students can receive 100 of the curriculum that our chm students are entitled to just like our elementary students. 
Thank you. 
That's all 23 board discussions. 
The first one we put on today uh was an adoption of the 20 2021 calendar. 
There was a talk of a change. 
Mr o'keefe 
yeah. 
It's just you know something I want to bring to the board's attention because obviously administration has been meeting with district administrators as well as our teachers looking at the opening of school and just trying to be sure that we can be as prepared as possible for whatever that is. 
Other districts have taken a look at this and also um chosen that option each year 
a district is allowed up to four superintendents conference days. 
we current calendar has three uh. 
The first two uh are in september the september second, and third days are superintendents conference days um and the third one would be. 
On election day november. 
Third, we've been discussing the possibility of having the board consider the ninth, which is wednesday
, I'm sorry, eighth, which would be the the first day of school for students to be a third superintendent's conference day in september uh. 
That would give staff teachers administrators everything all the time that staff teachers administrators need to be sure if there are those last minute, tweaks changes to classroom setups changes to schedules assignments. 
Whatever the case is, you know, I had a lengthy conversation with mr barbara last night. 
You know his guidance. 
Counselors are ready to dive in to do whatever work needs to be done to make our secondary experience as good as possible, but our need the data first. 
So once our have that data we can dive in on this, our don't have much time and time is not on our side um. 
So for your consideration, um our'd like to talk about adding the eighth as a superintendent's conference day. 
Would our have to remove another day off Our current calendar for that our would just convert that date to a super. 
I wouldn't alter Our current calendar right now other than that. 
Obviously, since the year hasn't even begun, uh the year still keeps us within legal limits. 
the year still leaves our the flexibility if our were to have a severe winter um. 
You know, maybe with the new reality of our ability to switch between distance learning. 
Maybe that can even help our. 
You know in bad storms and things like that, where our might be able to turn something like that on and not lose instructional time, but I think giving the staff that extra time, especially since our're down to the wire uh you know, could be helpful now on the counter side. 
Obviously, families are already starting to make plans families're ready to send kids back on the 8th families've already made decisions families've arranged child care. 
Whatever the case is so the case isn't just as simple as you deciding let's re-adopt a calendar, and maybe it's not even something you do tonight. 
Maybe it's something you consider you think about, and maybe it's on the next agenda for the 26th, but I wanted to bring the 26th to your attention to give you some time to think about the 26th and talk about the 26th. 
Um you know. 
Is it a possibility where our could consider that day, uh for additional staff planning? 
Does anybody have a question about the calendar? 
I'm just thinking our're gonna make this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come. 
our have to make this decision in which they will only receive 50 of the curriculum for years to come tonight, so parents do have enough time to make arrangements. 
Mr bauman, can you um what kind of professional development day would it look like? 
What would it look like? 
Well, it would be a useful day for the teachers too 
yeah. 
It's not a none. 
I mean miss heinz, can speak better to the professional development days. 
None of the teachers are going to be like the normal professional development days. 
I'm sorry
, I didn't mean professional development superintendent's day. 
Would it be a day that the teachers would be able to kind of get the teachers stuff together? 
Yes, we 
so I mean, as we've been saying, our teachers have been working hard all summer ongoing professional development. 
This is really more honored space for our teachers, so our teachers can continue to clean up. 
Get things ready, make sure the google classrooms all things lessons, are in place. 
So not our traditional. 
You know ad camp style superintendents conference days, but our recognize that it's a tremendous amount of work to get started. 
Does anybody have any other questions? 
Does anybody want to vote on it tonight or did you was the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready? 
the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready came through a conversation. 
You know, administration and staff have asked for the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready. 
So I agree with sarah 
the earlier the better I would agree as well. 
We can vote on the request made by the staff to have that extra data to get ready right now. 
All right motion to change the calendar to the eighth being a staff development day. 
Second, by miss volpe, all in favor opposed the calendar is done, get that information out to families as quickly as possible. 
The next item up for discussion is future board letter writing. 
This is something that I personally put on. 
I 
I don't think that we should be putting letters out to the community if, with all of we names on it, if we don't agree with what it says, um 
and I could be in the minority on that- 
but I'm I would be fine with writing a letter, putting spaces underneath and letting those who agree. 
Do it now 
most times it's a nine, nothing 
and there's no issues 
but um. 
You know I personally didn't agree with the letter that got put out and if my name is going to be on my name especially admonishing another board member. 
I have to agree with my name um 
and that's just the way I personally feel about my name. 
I understand that we're a body 
and I get that, but at the end of the day, it's our name and our have to put our head on our pillows and if our don't agree with something I want everyone to have the freedom to not only say that but be able to just to live with the decisions that are made and to be able to stand up to the community and say here. 
I did this or I did not do this and have a straight face when you say this
, I I 
just 
I didn't agree 
and it's my fault for you know ever putting my name on that piece of paper. 
So I just I want to put that piece of paper from here on out. 
If anyone has an issue, please feel free, but if, whatever letter it is, our write the letter that got put out, our names are on the bottom and our can sign the letter that got put out if our agree with the letter that got put out. 
If our don't, our take the space away 
and then you don't have to sign the space. 
If you don't want to, but at least you can, you can make your own decision and you don't have to feel like you're beholden, because maybe your own decision's only five people who agree with your own decision and five out of the nine agree and now, all of a sudden, it's a board decision and your name goes on it, no matter what jim so uh, how do you determine whose name is going on 
suppose four people want the letter that got put out is: 
is that sufficient to send the letter that got put out with four names? 
That's uh! 
That's why it's up for discussion, so I did it. 
So it's got to be a majority. 
Take to even have the letter that got put out go out, so five members have to support the letter that got put out and 
then, let's suppose the letter that got put out's a 5-4, the letter that got put out does go out board of education and the five members who agree with the letter that got put out sign the letter that got put out. 
That's 
I'm going to see that if anybody had an issue with that, I I just wanted to address it tonight so that we haven't had a chance to get all together in a room. 
So so let me express you on the opposite end of the spectrum. 
If four people want to put a letter out 
and it's a four or five board, the four people be able to put a letter out, 
because the way that, when you sign up for the board of education, you sign up as a group, okay and you vote as a group- 
okay 
and hey, listen, there are things that happened in the past. 
Why? 
I was on the no side of a vote where I got dragged to the mud, but I signed up for that 
yeah. 
You know, so my my impression is that five is a majority and 
and it's what moves resolutions 
and it's what moves you know uh. 
You know uh different different uh incent, you know initiatives and so on and so forth. 
So so I think the easy way to do that is that when you're getting attacked by a community member 
okay, because of what the letter that got put out says, your response is look the board. 
The board majority voted on the board. 
I don't necessarily agree with the board. 
You know, if you have concerns, please contact the rest of the board. 
You know right 
and that's how we leave the board. 
Just just my just my personal opinion this 
I happen to disagree only because when we pass, let's just say the new principle for sage of north in the in the minutes
, it will reflect that what jim voted. 
No, it's not going to vote that. 
Yes, we voted yes, but 
if you go look in the in the back to it, what jim can say I 
I 
I said no and 
what jim could say anybody to the community and here's why I voted no and what jim could put what jim head on what jim polo and what jim's fine 
like it will not reflect that. 
I said no and, and 
just like, I think it's wrong- 
that you get dragged through the mud on stuff that you voted no for, and you can't even back it up, because there is no record of you ever saying. 
No, unless you look through certain things on votes 
yeah, 
but if it's a letter, there's no record of anybody saying no, but if the letter that got put out's coming from the board of education is the letter's coming from the board of education coming from the board of education? 
Is the letter's coming from the board of education coming from five board members? 
I mean I
, so I guess my point is: I don't think we should be writing any letter. 
That's admonishing another member 
I mean most most letters are in agreement to the state saying we need we funding to the state saying we don't agree with certain things that most most letters're doing, but we should certainly not be or so um and- 
and maybe, mr black, you can answer this. 
When we get elected to the board of education, my voice means nothing more than anybody sitting out there. 
my voice only means one as part of we nine. 
we 
I have 
no say I can't decide anything. 
I have no more decision making than my neighbor next door. 
My my only input or influence comes as as a board of nine, so the letters that we had done previously, like supporting we seniors graduating in person or the denouncement of betty devos as the education or denouncing racism that was issued as a board, not as me as an individual. 
So I think legally, 
mr black, if you could just give we some guidance here that, when the board of education of sagem school district issues a letter, I think it has to come from the board. 
If laura slattery, who who lives in wisconsin, wants to send a letter to governor cuomo, then I signed my name: laura slattery, not laura slattery, ch, board of education, trustee and- 
and that's 
I feel that me on the board, I'm not a republican democrat independent anything. 
I am representing a community of 55 000 registered voters, my personal opinions or anything I feel 
personally does not matter when I'm sitting here with the nine nine of we. 
My only thing that I can do as a board trustee is in as a majority of the board. 
Unless, legally you see something, that's how I feel I was elected by the voters. 
I was elected by the community. 
I 
I feel like I have to represent the community as one of nine, not as laura slattery individual and, of course I don't think, that's being suggested um, 
but um we're a governing body and 
every governing body around the country operates that way. 
You operate as a body, you're elected to be part of a body. 
You make decisions as a as a body. 
There may be differences of opinion, that's part of our democracy. 
That's what makes the country great 
um you'll, be able to express those opinions. 
At the end of the day, you have to make a collective decision, and then you have to abide by the decision that that body makes one possible solution. 
Is that um? 
If you are going to issue a letter 
and there's concerns that um dissenting members vote is not going to be known like it is? 
When we take a public vote, you can take a public vote to send a letter, and then you can adopt a letter as a majority vote. 
Those who dissent are on as a matter of record 
Those who dissent're on Those who dissent're on record, if that's the case, so so you're saying that no one member is allowed to remove Those who dissent name from a letter. 
I would say that that's not typical practice that you would see, but is that's not typical practice that you would see legal for a member to remove a name um? 
Well, if the, when a letter is going out um, I don't think the typically sets forth all the names. 
I don't know. 
I don't really like to say it. 
Has it printed all your names on the left side, it says, there's a list of all the names and on the bottom, it's the president's name. 
So, on the left side of a letter it has all of our names listed 
yeah. 
But that's 
your that's! 
Your letterhead right 
yeah lists all your names. 
It doesn't indicate whether or not you voted for a letter to go out or not. 
It's you're represented on Your letterhead. 
Your letterhead's an official board of education stationery! 
That's why your name is on there. 
your name's not signaling that you voted for that or not, but the recognition is, though, that when you do take a vote or when the board puts out material that that's so so that's a fine
, that's a compromised decision. 
I think that any and all letters should be discussed in public and voted in our public. 
That is a concern that you have that's one way of addressing it. 
Yeah I 
I was just going. 
I was just going to say that that sounds like an excellent idea and that really just goes back to like 
you said about my vote. 
You know is on record and your eight votes are on record for these fine individuals here. 
So that would be the same thing. 
We discuss a letter. 
You know We take a vote on a letter. 
Yes, if it's a majority vote, a letter will go, but the dissenters are also in the minutes. 
I like a letter 
and I'm 100 in agreement with that. 
This way, it's a public discussion. 
Anybody can look back, but then We still are issuing a letter based on a majority of the board, but as long as there's a record of who votes yes and who votes? 
No, I'm correct. 
I am 100 fine with that. 
Just one statement and me and laura have gone round and round about this before, but I want to. 
I want to make this point. 
Look we're all elected members to the board as any elected official is. 
If I want to write a letter- 
and I want to sign my letter bill, cogan board trustee sachem
, I'm 100 within my rights- to do that. 
It's a matter of opinion as to whether or not I should do that if I want to get together with four other board members and each one of We 
want to sign it as board trustees. 
Once again, We are within We rights to do that. 
All right. 
It may be perceived as a bad idea by the board, but there's nothing illegal about the board. 
Okay, inside it's not a vote. 
I don't think We're going to take here. 
I just I just wanted to make sure that We discussed it 
and there was at least a public so that all future letter writing is done in public and just also just to add to all future letter writing. 
It's been customary that at the bottom of a letter, the signature block states, the president's name on behalf of yeah 
just signed a letter sincerely the board and not place the president's name on the bottom of the letter. 
Okay, uh, the last item up for discussion is the diversity task force. 
So, as you guys know, I gave you guys all an outline about what just got a little bit closer. 
Sorry, I gave you all the um an outline, probably in the end of july, and I don't know if you all got a chance to look it over 
yeah. 
I shared it with the board again um the other day. 
Sarah. 
So I would just like to like make a motion to put it on to vote tonight on establishing the diversity task force. 
Yeah 
I mean my my only issue is, and I don't have a problem with the diversity task force, but the way community committees are usually done is that we could vote to establish one 
give direction to administration to come back as to what the charge is going to be talk about the charge and then approve the charge um. 
I I 
I would say that that's that's, probably the route we should go and in the years that have been on the board, we establish construction capital projects, committees and 
you know some are established for one specific job 
and then they they they disappear, and that was for um one of the uh. 
You know construction projects that we did um 
after that we didn't do any for a while. 
So we didn't need that organization, but I would say that we we either vote on that organization tonight. 
Yes, we want to pursue something like this. 
we understand what the end game is, what we're trying to achieve and then um normally what happened is administration would put together a packet of a pamphlet, that's made available to the community. 
administration could download the community in a pdf format. 
People would sign up for the community submit in the same way People would for a budget advisory committee. 
You know 
or so 
or you know any other thing, so I would just say that we 
we follow a pdf format. 
You know and- 
and you know, we're not adopting exactly what the world no 
but we're establishing a diversity, task force and and charging administration to come back to we with what the charge is going to be. 
I would have no problem with that. 
Any questions everyone all in favor of 
I'm sorry, 
yep uh. 
I read the whole thing like lots of times. 
I think it's great, 
you know we need it here in saturn, all in favor, all right any opposed. 
Mr picariello
, this still uh one visitor that we had called wasn't here at the time. 
Um miss williamson. 
Thank you, miss williamson, I'm sorry! 
I know that it's late, I apologize. 
I was doing yard work 
and I was listening. 
Thank you and I had to come 
so I apologize um. 
This is my first time doing anything like this, so I really don't have anything written out or able to look up anything outside. 
So I'll tell you about myself. 
I have four children, three at hiawatha, two of them with severe nut allergies and one of them with viral induced asthma. 
I didn't, I don't really know. 
Well, let me just go with this. 
My kids are fine, My kids will be homeschooled and My kids will be homeschooled. 
Well. 
What about all the other children that aren't as lucky as My kids? 
How come? 
Nobody is talking about My kids? 
How come what nobody's talking about the children getting hit at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't eating at home? 
How come nobody's talking about the children that aren't learning or being sexually abused at home? 
Nobody cares about My kids. 
I hear a lot of things, how we're emptying the rooms and there's going to be nothing in there? 
No one's allowed to touch each other, no one's allowed near each other. 
we're not 
we're teaching 
we to be scared. 
I was scared for a long time. 
I've been hurt. 
I've been scared of allergies and a nut killing. 
My child fear cannot run we. 
we need to stand up for who we are and what we believe in 
and I believe all we children deserve a fair chance at life 
and we are not giving life to all our children. 
I think I think that's life. 
Thank you very much. 
I know that you waited a while. 
Thank you. 
Thank you. 
Letter c is board of ed discussion. 
Future agenda items future discussion. 
Items excuse me: does anyone have anything future to talk about covered three tonight? 
we okay, the next meeting. 
I don't know if that's the right date. 
That's today. 
No, the 26th okay is august. 
26Th, we're hoping to still be here at 7, 30 p.m. 
Can I have a motion to move into executive session 
yeah 
now we need a reason. 
Mr block um, we're discussing uh uh we're discussing uh property, yes, property. 
I'm sorry! 
I just lost me. 
First real estate transaction, yes real estate transaction. 
Can I have a motion motion by mr coggins say goodbye, mr bauman. 
All in favor meeting is good. 
Thank you very much. 
Everyone good night be careful. 
Going home, okay.
